[Cites 
16
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Amresh Chandra Mathur vs Chief Commissioner Of Gst, Panchkula ... on 10 January, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               के   ीयसूचनाआयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                            बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                         नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/GSTPZ/C/2021/640432 +
          CIC/GSTPZ/C/2021/640475

Amresh Chandra Mathur                              ....िशकायतकता  /Complainant

                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम

CPIO,
1. Office of the Principal Commissioner,
Indirect Taxes And Customs, Central CGST,
RTI Cell, Plot No. 36 and 37, Sector-32,
Gurugram-122001, Haryana.

2. Office of the Asst./Dy.Commissioner,
central Excise Division-ll, Ghaziabad,
RTI Cell, CGO Complex-ll, Kamla Nehru Nagar,
Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh-201002.                     ....  ितवादीगण /Respondent(s)

Date of Hearing                   :   05/01/2023
Date of Decision                  :   05/01/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

Note - The above mentioned Complaints have been clubbed together for
decision as these are based on similar RTI Application(s).

Relevant facts emerging from complaint:

RTI application(s) filed on       :   28/11/2020 & 22/01/2021
CPIO replied on                   :   04/01/2020 & 03/03/2021
First appeal(s) filed on          :   Not on record & 07/04/2020
First Appellate Authority order   :   Not on record
2nd Appeal/Complaint(s) dated     :   02/09/2021
                                         1
                            CIC/GSTPZ/C/2021/640432
Information sought
:

The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 28.11.2020 seeking the following
information:



   Kindly refer to the attached letters addressed to Jio Digital Fibre private
   limited, Reliance House, R K 4, Square Building No 4, DLF Cyber City, Gurgaon
   122002, Haryana by Nagar Nigam Ghaziabad and provide information taking
   cognizance of definition of information u/s 2(f) also into consideration:



1) Name and address of the GST office(s) responsible for collection/accounting of
   GST for work being executed by Jio Digital fibre private limited, in view of
   letters addressed to Jio Digital Fibre Private limited as per attached letter.



2) Description of taxable services and accounting codes, for payment of service
   tax applicable to the Jio Digital Fibre private limited, in view of letters
   addressed to Jio Digital Fibre private limited by Nagar Nigam Ghaziabad as per
   records of GST office(s) named in response to query 1.



3) Value of taxable services as per record of GST office(s) named in response to
   query 1.



4) In respect of Jio Digital fibre Private limited
   a. Name of the organization, for which Jio Digital Fibre private limited, is
   digging earth and laying cables, after taking permission from the local
   authorities as per attached letter and its GST no, as per records of GST office(s)
   named in response to query 1.

   b. Place of Provision of services as per records of GST office(s) named in
   response to query 1.

   c. GST no. of Jio Digital Fibre private limited.

   d. GST paid by Jio Digital Fibre private limited or having taken credit of GST
   paid by its contractors executive work as per attached letters, till 30
   September 2020 during FY 2020-21.

   e. Contract value of work on which GST will be accounted for by the office
   named in para 1.

   f. GST paid by Organization named in para 4a in respect getting work
   executed/ being executed through Jio Digital Fibre private limited or having
   taken credit of GST paid by Jio Digital Fibre private limited till September 2020.



                                         2


 The CPIO furnished a pointwise reply to the complainant on 04.01.2020 stating as
under:-

   1. In view of the Nagar Nigam Ghaziabad letter, the place of service is
      Ghaziabad which falls under the jurisdiction of CGST/SGST Ghaziabad.



   2. The letter addressed by Nagar Nigam Ghaziabad to M/s Jio Digital Fibre Pvt.

      Limited, Gurugram, pertains to the terms and conditions for laying down
      digital cable and digging of road, earthing etc. However, this office can only
      provide the names and accounting code of services for which M/s Jio Digital
      Fibre Pvt. Ltd. Is registered within the jurisdiction of this office, which is as
      under:-

      S.No. Description of services                  Service Accounting Code

      1.      Data Transmission services             998415

      2.      Internet access service in wired and 998422
              wireless mode

      3.      Other internet telecommunication 998429
              services n.e.c.

      4.      Other support services n.e.c.          998599


   3. Pertains to CGST/SGST Ghaziabad

   4. a. Pertains to CGST/SGST Ghaziabad
      b. Pertains to CGST/SGST Ghaziabad
      c. GST No. Of M/s Jio Digital Fibre Pvt. Limited Registered in Gurugram is
      06AAECJ4213B1Z8.

      d. Pertains to CGST/ SGST Ghaziabad
      e. Pertains to CGST/SGST Ghaziabad
      f. Pertains to CGST/SGST Ghaziabad


                            CIC/GSTPZ/C/2021/640475
Information sought:

The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 22.01.2021 with Respondent no. 1
seeking the following information:



A. I submitted a RTI DOREV/R/E/20/03467 to department of Revenue seeking
information reproduced in Para C) and through CBECE/R/T/20/01555 RTI
Application was finally transferred to CPIO (CGST, Gurugram) vide RTI No
GSTPK/R/T/20/00071 .(page 1 of the attachment) CPIO (CGST, Gurugram) in
response stated that most of the requested information will be available with
CGST/SGST, Ghaziabad (Page 2 and 3 of the attachment).



                                          3


 B. Thereafter I submitted a RTI CCEMT/R/E/21/00003 to CPIO CGST Ghaziabad
seeking information (reproduced in Para C) .( page 1 of attachment)
CPIO CGST Ghaziabad has stated that no information is available with him for the
reasons mentioned in his letter which is self-explanatory. (Page 4 of the
attachment)
                                          xxx
Kindly refer to the attached letters addressed to Jio Digital Fibre private limited,
Reliance House, R K 4, Square Building No 4, DLF Cyber City, Gurgaon 122002,
Haryana by Nagar Nigam Ghaziabad and provide information taking cognizance
of definition of information u/s 2(f) also into consideration:



1)     Name and address of the GST office(s) responsible for collection/accounting
of GST for work being executed by Jio Digital fibre private limited, in view of letters
addressed to Jio Digital Fibre Private limited as per attached letter.

2)     Description of taxable services and accounting codes, for payment of service
tax applicable to the Jio Digital Fibre private limited, in view of letters addressed
to Jio Digital Fibre private limited by Nagar Nigam Ghaziabad as per records of
GST office(s) named in response to query 1.

3)     Value of taxable services as per record of GST office(s) named in response to
query 1.

4)     In respect of Jio Digital fibre Private limited
a.     Name of the organization, for which Jio Digital Fibre private limited, is
digging earth and laying cables, after taking permission from the local authorities
as per attached letter and its GST no, as per records of GST office(s) named in
response to query 1.

b.     Place of Provision of services as per records of GST office(s) named in
response to query 1.

c.     GST no. of Jio Digital Fibre private limited.
d.     GST paid by Jio Digital Fibre private limited or having taken credit of GST

paid by its contractors executive work as per attached letters, till 30 September
2020 during FY 2020-21.

e.     Contract value of work on which GST will be accounted for by the office
named in para 1.

f.     GST paid by Organization named in para 4a in respect getting work
executed/ being executed through Jio Digital Fibre private limited or having taken
credit of GST paid by Jio Digital Fibre private limited till September 2020.



The CPIO/ Respondent no. 1 furnished a pointwise reply to the complainant on
03.03.2021 stating as under -



                                          4


 1.    In view of the Nagar Nigam Ghaziabad letter, the place of service is
Ghaziabad which falls under the jurisdiction of CGST/SGST Ghaziabad.



2.     The letter addressed by Nagar Nigam Ghaziabad to M/s Jio Digital Fibre Pvt.
Limited, Gurugram, pertains to the terms and conditions for laying down digital
cable and digging of road, earthing etc. However, this office can only provide the
names and accounting code of services for which M/s Jio Digital Fibre Pvt. Ltd. Is
registered within the jurisdiction of this office, which is as under:-



S.No.   Description of services                         Service Accounting Code

1.      Data Transmission services                      998415

2.      Internet access service in wired and wireless   998422
        mode

3.      Other internet telecommunication services       998429
        n.e.c.

4.      Other support services n.e.c.                   998599


3.      Pertains to CGST/SGST Ghaziabad

4.      a. Pertains to CGST/SGST Ghaziabad
b. Pertains to CGST/SGST Ghaziabad
c. GST No. Of M/s Jio Digital Fibre Pvt. Limited Registered in Gurugram is
06AAECJ4213B1Z8.

d. Pertains to CGST/ SGST Ghaziabad
e. Pertains to CGST/SGST Ghaziabad
 f. Pertains to CGST/SGST Ghaziabad

The Respondent no. 1 furnished an additional reply to the Complainant on the
same date i.e. 03.03.2021 by denying the information under 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of RTI
Act.



Being dissatisfied, the complainant filed a First Appeal dated 09.03.2019. FAA's
order, if any, is not available on record.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the complainant approached the Commission
with the instant set of Complaint (s).



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Complainant: Present through intra-video conference.



                                        5


 Respondent no. 1: Maninder Singh, Dy. Commissioner & Rep. of CPIO present
through intra-video conference.



Respondent no. 2: Sajjan Singh, Superintendent (RTI) & Rep. of CPIO present
through intra-video conference.



The Respondent no. 1 submitted that a point wise reply along with relevant
information has already been provided to the Complainant earlier which was
further supplied to him on 28.12.2022. He further submitted that even if the
Complainant is not satisfied, he has every opportunity to come and inspect the
relevant records of information sought at the office of CGST, Gurugram.



The Complainant raised dissatisfaction with the CPIO's reply on the following
arguments -



   1. CPIO vide letter dated 28-12-2022 has provided incomplete information that
   also after one and half year of 1" AA order dated 07-06-2021 to provide
   information.



   2. CPIO has simply forwarded information provided by an Assistant
   Commissioner CGST, Division East 1.



   3. CPIO has ignored

   a. the fact that stated to be "not awailable in this office" vide Query 4a, 4e and
   4f can be accessed by CPIO from Jio Digital Fibre private limited as

   per definition of information u/s 2f and b. the fact that documents attached
   with the RTI application showed place of provision of service as Ghaziabad
   which is in UP where-as in response to Query 4b CPIO writes place of Provision
   of Service as Haryana which are mutually self-contradictory.



   4. Query wise response of CPIO and Complainant's observations are detailed
   below


   1. Query 1-Information Provided

   2. Query 2-Information Provided

   3. Query 3-Information Provided

   4. Query 4 In respect of Jio Digital Fibre private limited




                                          6

 a. Name of the organisation, for which Jio Digital Fibre private limited, is
digging earth and laying cables, after taking permission from local authorities
as per attached letters and its GST no, as per records of GST office(s) named in
response to query 1.



Information not provided. Complainant believes that information sought is
accessible to CPIO as information is defined
 u/s 2(f)
 of the RTI Act 2005 and
CPIO has made no attempt to access the information sought with malafide
intention because information if provided is going to disclose high level of tax
evasion.



b. Place of Provision of Services as per records of GST office(s) named in
response to query 1.

Information provided is false/ misleading because company was carrying out:

digging and cable laying operations in Ghaziabad, UP after taking due
permission from Municipal Corporation of Ghaziabad taking into consideration
information provided by CPIO vide query 1. Intension of CPIO is simply
malafide because he avoids taking cognisance of documents attached with RTI
Application while responding to RTI application.



c. GST no of Jio Digital Fibre private limited.



Information provided

d. GST paid by Jio Digital Fibre private limited or having taken credit of GST
paid by its contractors executing work as per attached letters, till 30
September 2020 during FY 2020-2021.



Information provided

Contract value of work on which GST will be accounted for by office named in
Para 1.



Information not provided. Complainant believes that information sought is
accessible to CPIO as information is defined
 u/s 2(f)
 of the RTI Act 2005 and
CPIO has made no attempt to access the information sought with malafide
intention because information if provided is going to disclose high level of tax
evasion.



                                        7


     f. GST paid by Organisation named in Para 4a in respect getting work
    executed/being executed through Jio Digital Fibre private limited or having
    taken credit of GST paid by Jio Digital Fibre private limited till 31 Dec 2020.



    Information not provided. Complainant believes that information sought is
    accessible to CPIO as information is defined
 u/s 2(f)
 of the RTI Act 2005 and
    CPIO has made no attempt to access the information sought with malafide
    intention because information if provided is going to disclose high level of tax
    evasion.



 
5. Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the judgment of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi,
    in the matter of 
Dr. Deepak Juneja vs Central Information Commission
 29 April,
    2019 in WP (C) 11489 of 2016 that clearly explained the difference between
    
section 18
 and 
19
 of the RTI Act 2005.




                                            xxx

    PRAYER

    1. issue the notice in the format notified by Central Information Commission
    vide order CIC/4/2016-Rgr on 26-09-2018 to the CPIO whose names appear in
    the complaint/documents attached with complaint.



    2. Conduct inquiry under provisions of 
section 18
 of the RTI Act, 2005


 
3. If Hon'ble Commission decides to not to conduct inquiry under provisions of
    
section 18
 of the RTI Act 2005 then please give speaking order for not
    conducting inquiry, 4. Any other order to ensure that complaint
 u/s 18
 is
    adjudicated in terms of the provisions of the Act and Supreme Court Order of
    Hon'ble Supreme Court of India dated December 12, 2011 in Civil Appeal Nos
    10787-10788 of 2011 in 
Chief Information Commissioner and Another vs State
    of Manipur and Another
 in letter and spirit so that 
section 18
 of the RTI Act
    2005 does not become a redundant section.




    5. Action(s) u/s 
section 20
 of the RTI Act 2005..."



The Complainant further narrated his grievance regarding laying down of wi-fi
transmission cable lines by the Jio Fibrenet Ltd. passing through his house which
create disruption in his easement right of way to his home. Such circumstances
led him to resort to 
RTI Act
; however he is aggrieved by the fact that the CPIO did
not facilitate him complete desired information after liasioning with the private
entity i.e. Jio Fibrenet Pvt. Ltd. as per 
Section 2(f)
 read with 
Section 2(j)
 of the Act.

                                           8


 He also contested the fact that his RTI Applications has been transferred to the
Respondent no. 2 without application of mind for which he prayed the
Commission that the CPIO should be penalized for the alleged faults.



In response to Complainant's contentions, the CPIO again reiterated his reply by
submitting that there was no malafide intention on their part to withheld
information and all available information has been provided to the Complainant.
He re-volunteered to facilitate inspection of relevant records opportunity to the
Complainant for his satisfaction.



Decision

The Commission upon a perusal of records and after hearing submissions of the
parties finds no infirmity in the reply and as a sequel to it further clarifications
tendered by the Respondent no. 1 during hearing as it adequately suffices the
information sought by the Complainant in terms of 
RTI Act
.



Moreover, the Commission is not inclined to accept the contention of the
Complainant for initiating penal action against the CPIO in the absence of any
malafide ascribed on their part. 
In this regard, the attention of the Complainant is
drawn towards a judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the matter of

Registrar of Companies & Ors. v. Dharmendra Kumar Garg & Anr
. [W.P.(C)
11271/2009] dated 01.06.2012 wherein it was held:


      " 61. It can happen that the PIO may genuinely and bonafidely entertain the
      belief and hold the view that the information sought by the querist cannot
      be provided for one or the other reasons. Merely because the CIC eventually
      finds that the view taken by the PIO was not correct, it cannot automatically
      lead to issuance of a show cause notice under 
Section 20
 of the RTI Act and
      the imposition of penalty. The legislature has cautiously provided that only
      in cases of malafides or unreasonable conduct, i.e., where the PIO, without
      reasonable cause refuses to receive the application, or provide the
      information, or knowingly gives incorrect, incomplete or misleading
      information or destroys the information, that the personal penalty on the
      PIO can be imposed...."



Additionally, the following observation of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in 
Bhagat
Singh v. CIC & Ors. WP(C
) 3114/2007 are pertinent in this matter:




     "17. This Court takes a serious note of the two year delay in releasing
     information, the lack of adequate reasoning in the orders of the Public
     Information Officer and the Appellate Authority and the lack of application of

                                         9

      mind in relation to the nature of information sought. The materials on record
     clearly show the lackadaisical approach of the second and third respondent in
     releasing the information sought. However, the Petitioner has not been able
     to demonstrate that they malafidely denied the information sought.
     Therefore, a direction to the Central Information Commission to initiate
     action under 
Section 20
 of the Act, cannot be issued."



Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the decision of Col. 
Rajendra
Singh v. Central Information Commission and Anr. WP (C
) 5469 of 2008 dated
20.03.2009 had held as under:




     "....
Section 20
, no doubt empowers the CIC to take penal action and direct
     payment of such compensation or penalty as is warranted. Yet the
     Commission has to be satisfied that the delay occurred was without
     reasonable cause or the request was denied malafidely.

                                         xxx
     ......The preceding discussion shows that at least in the opinion of this Court,
     there are no allegations to establish that the information was withheld
     malafide or unduly delayed so as to lead to an inference that petitioner was
     responsible for unreasonably withholding it."



The Commission also notes that Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana at
Chandigarh in Civil Writ Petition No.6504 of 2009 Date of decision: 04.03.2010
(
State of Punjab and others vs. State Information Commissioner, Punjab and
another
); had held as under:




     "3. The penalty provisions under 
Section 20
 is only to sensitize the public
     authorities that they should act with all due alacrity and not hold up
     information which a person seeks to obtain. It is not every delay that should
     be visited with penalty."



In addition to above, the issue raised by the Complainant regarding disturbance of
his easement right of way owing to laying of cable wires by Jio Firbrenet is a
matter of grievance which is outside the mandate of 
RTI Act
. 
In this regard,
reference may be had of a judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the matter
of 
Govt. of NCT of Delhi vs. Rajender Prasad (W.P.[C
] 10676/2016) dated
30.11.2017 wherein it was held as under:


        "6. The CIC has been constituted under 
Section 12
 of the Act and the powers
of CIC are delineated under the Act. The CIC being a statutory body has to act
strictly within the confines of the Act and is neither required to nor has the
jurisdiction to examine any other controversy or disputes."

                                        10


 
While, the Apex Court in the matter of 
Union of India vs Namit Sharma (Review
Petition [C] No.2309
 of 2012) dated 03.09.2013 observed as under:


      "20. ...While deciding whether a citizen should or should not get a particular
information "which is held by or under the control of any public authority", the
Information Commission does not decide a dispute between two or more parties
concerning their legal rights other than their right to get information in
possession of a public authority...." (Emphasis Supplied)

In view of the foregoing observations and considering the inability of the
Complainant in substantiating his level of dissatisfaction with the CPIO's reply in
the instant Complaints, no further action is warranted in the instant matters.



                  The Complaint(s) are disposed of accordingly.



                                                     Saroj Punhani(सरोज पुनहािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सू
                                                                   सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणतस"यािपत ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ,उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक / Date





                                        11