[Cites 
17
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Ira Chopra vs Department Of Personnel & Training on 15 April, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                  के       यसच
                                             ू नाआयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/DOP&T/C/2022/642389

IRA CHOPRA                                                  ....िशकायतकता /Complainant
                                            VERSUS
                                             बनाम

CPIO,
Department of Personnel and
Training, RTI Cell, North
Block, New Delhi-110001.                                     ...  ितवादीगण/Respondent

Date of Hearing                        :    13/04/2023
Date of Decision                       :    13/04/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :                  Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from complaint:

RTI application filed on               :    18/07/2022
CPIO replied on                        :    Not on record
First appeal filed on                  :    Not on record
First Appellate Authority order        :    Not on record
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated             :    02/08/2022


Information sought
:

The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 18.07.2022 seeking information as
under:



"1.0 The RTI applications number DOP&T/R/E/22/03497 dated 20.06.2022 and
DOP&T/R/E/22/03498 dated 20.06.2022 which has been unlawfully stated to be


                                               1

 disposed off by Shri Amit Srivastava, Under Secretary, Appointments Committee of
Cabinet vide Letter No. 28/18/2022-EO (ACC) dated 15.07.2022 received on
18.07.2022 through RTI portal is being re-submitted and enclosed to the instant
application along-with the following add-on submissions.
The requisite information sought in both the RTI applications referenced above
is requested to be provided within 48 hours of receipt of instant RTI application."



The contents of the RTI Application dated 20.06.2022 enclosed therewith state as
under:



"Please provide information which is sought not only in public interest but also
under 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, where the undersigned is entitled to Right
to Information within the meaning of 
Section 3
, which confers right to all citizens
under provisions of this act. The information sought does not fall under any
exemptions
 u/s 8(1)(a)
 to 
8(1)(j)
, and more importantly 8(1)(h), and not to be
stated as under-investigation. The investigation is to be carried out by Magistrate
of First Class / Special Judge and not by the Establishment Officer, for which the
petitioner / complainant will be appearing in person before the Magistrate of First
Class / Special Judge, as laid down in 
section 197
 of the CrPC 1973.



Reference: Previous application for prosecution sanction of a Board Level
Appointee for the perusal of Hon'ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi ji being
the Chairperson of Appointments Committee of Cabinet, was addressed to Hon'ble
Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi ji duly receipted by o/o Establishment Officer,
DoPT on 23.12.2021 for & on his behalf. Final decision for the sanction order was
& is to be taken by the Hon'ble Prime Minister on basis on proposal to be initiated
by 0/o Establishment Officer.



Backdrop:

Duly receipted on 23.12.2021, Application No. ANK/CONF/2021/110 dated
21.12.2021 seeking prosecution sanction against a Board Level appointee of
Appointments Committee of the cabinet - Shri Anil Kumar Pathak, Board Level
Executive, Member (Planning) / Member (HR), Airports Authority of India, was
addressed to Hon'ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi ji, Chairman -

Appointments Committee of the Cabinet through Establishment Officer with the
header - "Application for sanction of criminal prosecution under 
section 197
 of the
CrPC 1973 against an appointee of Appointments Committee of the cabinet - Shri




                                         2

 Anil Kumar Pathak, Board Level Executive, Member (Planning) / Member (HR)
Airports Authority of India", and sent vide speed post no ED041178997IN dated
21.12.2021 (enclosed) to Establishment Officer.



Vide para 31 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court Order in the matter of 
Dr.
Subramanian Swamy Vs. Dr. Manmohan Singh and another
, AIR 2012 SC 1185, it
is stated - "the aforementioned guidelines are in conformity with the law 
laid
down by
 this Court that while considering the issue regarding grant or refusal of
sanction, the only thing which the Competent Authority is required to see is
whether the material placed by the complainant or the investigating agency prima
facie discloses commission of an offence. The Competent Authority cannot
undertake a detailed inquiry to decide whether or not the allegations made
against the public servant are true."




Vide para 27 of the same order, it is also stated - "grant or refusal of sanction is
not a quasi-judicial function and the person for whose prosecution the sanction is
sought is not required to be heard by the Competent Authority before it takes a
decision in the matter. What is required to be seen by the Competent Authority is
whether the facts placed before it which, in a given case, may include the material
collected by the complainant or the investigating agency prima facie disclose
commission of an offence by a public servant."



Public Interest:

(a) If a Board Level Official, who is an appointee by the Appointments Committee
of the Cabinet indulgences in criminal acts punishable under 
CrPC
 / 
IPC
, and is
further allowed to do so, then the entire governmental machinery will be put to
halt. There will be anarchy and chaos in the country. If those whose duty is to
comply with directions, to act within the circumscribed limits of rules and
regulations, act otherwise under whims and fancies upon self-discretion, without
abiding to laid down rules, then the rule of law will be surely set at naught.

(b) 
Under the RTI Act
, providing information is the rule and denial a rarest of
rare exception. Public interest in disclosure of the above information will be
served by unveiling and unravelling the irregularities and/or violation of
prescribed rules & procedures by the government servant against whom
prosecution sanction has been sought / prayed and will aid in improving
transparency & accountability in a governmental set up for which the 
RTI Act,
2005
 was enacted by an act of parliament. You will certainly agree that the true
purpose of 
RTI Act
 gets defeated, if the information is held back by the public
authority on one false pretext or other.

                                         3


 (c) Even otherwise, there is no requirement in the Act of establishing any public
interest for information to be obtained by the sovereign Citizen; nor is there any
requirement to establish larger public interest, unless an exemption is held to be
valid, to be supported by cogent lawful reasons thereof.

(d) The law categorically states that no reasons shall be required to be supplied by
the applicant. Truth remains the Truth and it is not important who accesses it. If
there is a larger public interest in disclosing a Truth, it is not relevant who gets it
revealed.

(e) Hence, proactive disclosure is requested and PIO is requested not to take
shelter under 
section 8(1)(a)
, 
8(1)(d)
, 
8(1)(j)
, 
8(1)(h)
 or for that matter 8(1)(e) or
any other sections of 
RTI Act
 2005. Further, notwithstanding anything contained in

Official Secrets Act
 1923(19 of 1923), nor any of the exemptions permissible in
accordance with subsection (1), a public authority needs to allow access to
information, if public interest in disclosure outweighs the harm to the protected
interests, and public interest is evident in the instant case.

(f) Hon'ble CIC has time and again held that 
Section 8(2)
 of the RTI Act mandates
that even where disclosure of information is protected by the exemptions
 u/s 8(1)

of the RTI Act, if public interest is there, it should be provided.



For the over said cogent reasons, PIO is requested to please obtain and provide
the following from 0/o Establishment Officer, DoPT:



1. Information on the status of the sanction order against application stated in
backdrop, explicitly stating whether the sanction has been denied. The said
information is requested in binary (yes /no ) format only.



2. Certified copy of "sine qua non self-contained para wise (para 1.0 to 39.0)
reasoned and seasoned Speaking order" by reduction of "each" para of the
application stated in the backdrop above, in writing, by assigning cogent reasons
thereof, in a manner known to the establishment, law, administrative manual and
the benchmark set in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure
s 1973 / 
CrPC
, may please be
provided, if at all the sanction has been denied.



3. Certified copy and for information thereof of the "maximum allowable time
period" prescribed under statutes / as known to the establishment /Establishment
Officer for grant of prosecution sanction by the appointing authority from the date
of receipt of the application / proposal by the appointing authority.



                                          4


 4. Date on which the proposal for the prosecution sanction was put up to the
appointing authority Hon'ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi ji, Chairman --

Appointments Committee of the Cabinet.



5. Copy of the noting sheet of the proposal stated in 4 above.



6. Cut-off date on which the "prosecution sanction order" will be provided or is
being provided.



7. Please indicate the norm regarding the time taken to attend an application
seeking prosecution sanction order.



8. As stated in the backdrop, it is a settled position that investigation in the matter
brought out in the application dated 21.12.2021 was beyond jurisdictional area of
the Establishment Officer and was to be sin-qua-non carried by the Magistrate of
First Class / Special Judge and not by the Establishment Officer for which the
petitioner / complainant will be appearing in person before the Magistrate of First
Class / Special Judge.



The said application for prosecution sanction was merely to aid the appointing
authority to assess / establish prima facie the commission of offence. PIO is thus
requested to obtain and provide the copy of the proposal / noting sheet by which
the 0/o Establishment Officer prima facie established commission of the offence.
The hackneyed, ritualistic expression that - matter is under investigation, may
kindly be best avoided, in the interest of truth & transparency in a governmental
setup.



9. Accompaniment to the above, it is also submitted that after receipt of
information and certified copies under this RTI application, the undersigned also
ADDITIONALLY intends to carry out an actual inspection of records and obtain
additional certified photocopies of records identified by me during the inspection. I
may be permitted such inspection, as permitted under 
Section 4 (f)
 of RTI Act.
2005. Application for inspection of records may please be read as part and parcel
of this application. This RTI itself may also please be treated as application for the
inspection of records under the provisions of 
Section 10 (1)
 Severability and other
relevant sections of 
RTI Act
. 2005."



                                          5


 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with non-receipt of a reply within 48 hours of
filing the RTI Application, complainant approached the Commission with the
instant Complaint.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Complainant: Not present.

Respondent: Rajeev Lochan, US & CPIO along with Vijay Kumar Darak, Dy.
Director present in person.



The CPIO submitted that although the precise nature of the information sought
for by the Complainant, however, she was provided with the following reply on
03.08.2022:



      "The administrative Ministry in respect of Board level officers of the Airports
Authority of lndia (AAI) is the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Further, Rule3 (3) of the
Allocation of Business Rules 1961 (copy enclosed) provides as under:



       Where sanction of the prosecution of any person for any offence is required
to be accorded:

       (a) If he is Government servant, by the Department which is the Cadre
Controlling authority for the service of which he is a member' and in any other
case, by the Department in which he was working at the time of commission of the
alleged offence;

       (b) If he is a public servant other than a government servant, appointed by
the Central Government, by the Department administratively concerned with the
organization in which he was working at the time of commission of the alleged
offence; and

       (c) In any other case, by the Department which administers the Act under
which the alleged offence is committed. Hence, your representation/application
dated 21.11.2021 was forwarded to the Ministry of Civil Aviation, vide this
Secretariat's OM dated 10.01.2022 (copy enclosed).



      A copy of the guidelines issued vide communication No.107/8/99-AVal
dated 27.10.1999 is enclosed. The same is also available on DoPT website
athttps://documents. doptcirculars.nic.in/D2/D02ser/16032021vN2ds.pdf
      The information sought by you may be available with the Ministry of Civil
Aviation. Thus, your RTI applications Reg. No. DOP&T/R/E/22/03497 &

                                          6

 DOP&T/R/E/22/03498) dated 22.06.2022 were also forwarded to the CPIO, the
Ministry of Civil Aviation for providing information directly.



       Furthermore, the RTI application has also been sent to CPIO and Under
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan, New Delhi (with a copy
of RTI application) - for providing information directly to the applicant."



Decision

The Complainant observes from a perusal of the facts on record that the
Complainant filed the instant complaint on the grounds that she did not receive a
reply to the instant RTI Application within 48 hours as envisaged under the
proviso to 
Section 7(1)
 of the RTI Act.



Now, it is pertinent to note that the Complainant vide the instant RTI Application
did not seek for any information but narrated at length her grouse against non-
receipt of desired information on two of her earlier RTI Applications filed on
20.06.2022, containing equally cumbersome contents, referring to prosecution
sanction against Anil Kumar Pathak, Board Level Executive, Member
(Planning)/Member (HR), Airports Authority of India, and raising a host of queries
about the action taken on her request for prosecution sanction.



Now, there is nothing on record to explain as to how the appointment of or the
prosecution sanction against Anil Kumar Pathak, a third party, affects the life and
liberty of the Complainant. Moreover, her RTI Application(s) do not even qualify
under 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act as being largely hypothetical in nature and does
not conform to the word limit prescribed under Rule 3 of the RTI Rules, 2012.



Adverting to the foregoing observations, the Commission finds the instant
complaint bereft of merit.



                     The Complaint is dismissed accordingly.



                                                     Saroj Punhani(सरोजपुनहािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सू
                                                                   सूचनाआयु )



                                         7

 Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणतस यािपत ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ,उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक / Date





                                 8