[Cites 
19
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Devesh Singh vs Chief Commissioner Of Income Tax (Cca) , ... on 8 June, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               के ीय सूचना आयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                            बाबागंगनाथमाग, मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/CCITC/A/2022/144781

Devesh Singh                                             ......अपीलकता/Appellant

                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम

CPIO,
Dy. Director of Income Tax (Investigation)-3,
Gurugram, RTI Cell, 3rd Floor, HSIIDC
Building, Vanijya Nikunj, Phase-V, Udyog
Vihar, Sector-19, Gurugram, Haryana-122016.           .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                   :   06/06/2023
Date of Decision                  :   06/06/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on          :   10/05/2022
CPIO replied on                   :   13/06/2022
First appeal filed on             :   13/06/2022
First Appellate Authority order   :   27/06/2022
Second Appeal dated               :   20/09/2022

Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 10.05.2022 seeking the following
information:



                                        1


 "Subject Matter:

      Requisition proceedings under 
Section 132A
 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 of
the Applicant pursuant to seizure of cash during Haryana Assembly Election on
17.10.2019 by Police Station, DLF Phase-I, Gurugram and subsequent proceedings
undertaken by Investigation Officer, Income Tax Department, Aayakar Bhawan,
HSIIDC Building, Udyog Vihar Phase V, Gurugram, Haryana.



Details of Information requested/sought:

You are kindly requested to provide me the information on the following:



1. Request to provide the outcome, Order(s), direction(s) passed in 
Section 132A
 of
the Income Tax Act, 1961 proceedings in the case of the Applicant (Devesh Singh)
having PAN: BLOPS7633B convened in the month of October 2019 by Investigation
Officer, Income Tax Department, Government of India, Aayakar Bhawan, HSIIDC
Building, Udyog Vihar Phase V, Gurugram, Haryana.



2. Request to provide the statement(s) recorded, documents (including those
recovered from the electronic devices, Forensic Image, Form 65B/Hash Value, COC
form, etc) as considered/impounded during the said 
Section 132A
 proceedings of
the Applicant."



The CPIO provided a reply to the appellant on 13.06.2022 stating as under:



       "1. In exercise of the powers conferred by sub section (2) of 
section 24
 of RTI
Act, 2005(No. 22 of 2005) the Central Government vide its officials notification
dated 27/03/2008 in GSA 235(E) issued by Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievance
& Pension(Department of Personnel & Training)has placed the office of the
Director General of Income Tax (Inv.) In second 
Schedule of the RTI Act, 2005
. The
office of the CPI0, i.e DDIT (Inv.)-3, Gurugram is under administrative control of
the Director General of Income Tax (Inv.), NWR, Chandigarh, therefore, this office
is also exempt from providing the information under the 
RTI Act, 2005
.



       2. All the records related to requisition made under 
section 132(1)
 of the I.T
Act including seized material, statements recorded in case of Sh. Devesh Singh has
been handed over to the 0/o Joint Director of Income Tax(Inv.), Aaykar Bhawan,
Sector-2, Panchkula."



                                          2


 Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 13.06.2022. FAA's order
dated 27.06.2022 furnished a revised pointwise reply to the Appellant stating as
under:



      "1. With regards to the information sought by the applicant, I concur with
the order passed under 
RTI Act
 2005 by DDIT Gurugram dated 13.06.2022. The
O/o DDIT (Inv.), Gurugram is under the administrative control of DGIT (Inv.),
Chandigarh which is exempt from furnishing information under 
RTI Act
.
Accordingly, the information sought by the applicant cannot be provided.



       2.Reply in response to said information sought by the applicant has been
provided by the DDIT(Inv.)-3, Gurugram cum CPIO vide letter no. 53 dated
13.06.2022."



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Represented by Advocate Himanshu Dubey present through intra-
video conference.



Respondent: Represented by Sandeep Giri, ITO (Inv.) (Hq.) present through intra-
video conference.



The Advocate of the Appellant invited attention of the bench towards his written
submission dated 05.06.2023 wherein he raised his arguments regarding the
denial of information by the CPIO on the following lines -



      "..... 5. It is important to highlight herein that the information sought was
with regard to the requisition proceedings under conducted 
Section 132A
 of the
Income Tax Act, 1961 wrt the Applicant pursuant to the seizure of cash during
Haryana Assembly Election on 17.10.2019 by Police Station, DLF Phase-1,
Gurugram and subsequent proceedings undertaken by Investigation Officer,
Income Tax Department, Aayakar Bhawan, HDIIDC Building, Udyog Vihar Phase V,
Gurugram, Haryana.

                                            xxx



                                         3

 SUBMISSION :-



I. Right to information is a Constitutional right where providing information is
the general rule whereas declining sharing of information is the exception,

a In CBSE V Aditya Bandopadhyay, 2011 (8) SCC 497, the Hon'ble Supreme Court,
while quoting the earlier decision reported in 2004 (2) SCC 476 (People's Union for

Civil Liberties Vs Union of India
), held that the "right to information" is a facet of
the freedom of "speech and expression", as contained in 
Article 19(1)(a)
 of the
Constitution of India and such a right is subject to any reasonable restriction in the
interest of the security of the State and subject to exemptions and exceptions.




b. 
Right to Information Act, 2005
 (herein after referred to as the Act) was passed
by the Parliament as an Act to provide for setting out the practical regime of right
to information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of
public authorities, in order to promote transparency and accountability in the
working of every public authority as stated in its preamble.



c. The word 'information' has been defined under 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act, 2005 as
any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, emails, opinions,
advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, reports. papers,
samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and information
relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any
other law for the time being in force.



d. In Section 2 (j) of RTI Act, 2005 right to information' means the right to
information accessible under this Act which is held by or under the control of any
public authority and includes the right to:



i. inspection of work, documents, records;



ii. taking notes, extracts, or certified copies of documents or records;



iii. taking certified samples of material:



iv. obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes, video
cassettes or in any other electronic mode or through printouts where such
information is stored in a computer or in any other device;



                                             4


 e. The Right to Information is also a constitutional right as the right to free speech
also guarantees right to receive and collect and information. Freedom of speech
and expression guaranteed under 
Article 19(1) (a)
 impliedly includes freedom and
right to information as held by Supreme Court in Bennett Coleman & Co. Ys Union
of India.



f. 
Article 51
 A of the Constitution imposes certain duties upon the citizens and a
citizen with full information is better equipped for the performance of these
duties. Thus, right to information is an inherent part of Right to Freedom of Speech
and Expression under 
article 19(1)(a)
 and the Right to Life and Personal Liberty
under 
Article 21
 of the constitution.



g. In background of the above information, the information sought by the
Applicant/ Appellant is an inherent part of Right to Freedom of Speech and
Expression under 
article 19(1) (a)
 and the Right to Life and Personal Liberty under

article 21
 of the constitution.



II. NECESSITY RECOGNIZES NO LAW:



   a. The Appellant/ Applicant herein is seeking information qua his matter. The
      information sought by the Applicant is pertaining to his requisition
      proceedings under 
Section 132A
 of the Income Tax Act, 1961.



   b. The Information sought is crucial for the Appellant/ Applicant to defend
      himself before court of Law.



   c. According to the Principal of adequate disclosure. It is the legal right of the
      Applicant/Appellant that material relied upon against the
      Applicant/Appellant must be disclosed to the person to whose prejudice
      such material may be used for taking adverse action.



   d. Without having access to the information, the Appellant/ Applicant is
      incapable of effectively defend it's case. As held in catena of judgements
      "the right to fair hearing is a guaranteed right. Every person before an
      authority exercising the adjudicatory powers has a right to know the
      evidence to be uses against him." Every person has the right to protect
      himself.



                                          5


    e. It is most humbly submitted that the appellant is entitled to the information
       sought. The expression "human rights" is defined in 
Section 2(d)
 of the
       Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993.

b. It is neither the case of the Respondent that any process of investigation is
underway; nor there is any material to indicate that disclosure of the information
as sought would impede any such investigation. However, not supplying of the
information would definitely impact the Applicant/Appellant in the remedy
available to him under the law to defend the

                                        xxx

IV. WITHOUT PREJUDICE, NO INFORMATION HAS BEEN SOUGHT FROM THE
OFFICE OF DGIT (INV)

a In exercise of the powers conferred by sub section (2) of the 
Section 24
 of the RTI
Act, 2005 (No. 22 of 2005) the Central Government vide its official notification
dated 27.03.2008 in GSR 235(E) issued by Ministry of Personnel Public Grievance &
Pension (Department of Personnel & Training) has placed the office of the Director
General of Income Tax (Inv.) in second 
Schedule of the RTI Act, 2005
.



b. It is most humbly submitted no information has been sought from DGIT (Inv),
Chandigarh. The literal rule means that one has to consider what the statute says
"literally, i.e its simple plain meaning without any ambiguity. It is said that the
words themselves best declare the intention of the law-givers. Nowhere has the
statute exempted the O/O of JDIT from providing the information. Accordingly. the
present case does not fall under the exemption of the 
Section 24
 of the RTI Act,
2005.



The reply filed by the CPIO and reply of the first appellate authority are issued
from the same office. Thus, there is no application of mind which passing of the
order by the FAA.



V. NO INFORMATION IS SOUGHT ABOUT THE THIRD PARTY.



a. A man preparing for his self- defense is exercising his basic human right to lead
a dignifies life with personal liberty. In catena of judicial pronouncements, the
right to a have a fair trial is held to be an embodiment of the 
Article 14
 read with

Article 21.




                                         6


 b. The information sought by the Applicant is crucial to the applicant. And the
information sought by the Applicant does not relate to any third party but his own
requisition proceedings.



VI. The response received from the Respondent that all the records related to
requisition made under 
section 132(1)
 of the IT Act including seized material,
statements recorded in case of Sh. Devesh Singh has been handed over to the O/O
Joint Director of Income Tax (Inv.) Aaykar Bhawan, Sector-2, Panchkula is again
not appreciated as 
Section 6(3)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 makes it mandatory that
where an application is made to a public authority requesting for an information.-

(i) which is held by another public authority; or (ii) the subject matter of which is
more closely connected with the functions of another public authority, the public
authority to which such application is made, shall transfer the application or such
part of it as may be appropriate to that other public authority and inform the
applicant immediately about such transfer. However, in the present case no such
attempt was made by the Respondent.



VII. PRINCIPLE OF NATURAL JUSTICE

   a. Apart from Preamble to the Constitution of India, Art 14 ensures equality
      before law and equal protection of law to the citizen of India. Art 14 strikes
      at the root of arbitrariness and Art 21 guarantees right to life and liberty
      which is the fundamental provision to protect liberty and ensure life with
      dignity. Art 22 guarantees natural justice and provision of fair hearing to
      the arrested person. The violation of principles of natural justice results in
      arbitrariness; therefore, violation of natural justice is a violation of Equality
      clause of 
Art. 14.




   b. That the information sought by the Appellant is to enable him to
      successfully prepare his case and deal with the material relied upon by the
      Authorities while passing the assessment order.



 
c. That in Appeal No. 07/IC(A)/CIC/2006- Order dated 06-03-2006- In the case
      of 
Dinesh Berry Vs CPIO, Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd
, following has
      been held:




   4. The information sought is required by the appellant to defend his case
   properly. The information sought by the appellant relate to the tour


                                          7

    programme and travel expenses of a public servant, which cannot be treated
   as personal information.

   5. The Commission therefore direct CPIO of BPCL, Mumbai to provide the
   information sought by the appellant within fifteen days of the issue of this
   decision.



   d. Further, Right to fair hearing and right of granting a fair opportunity to the
      Appellant is inherent within the principals of natural justice and by avoiding
      the Appellant an opportunity to rebut the documents/ material relied upon
      by the authorities while passing the assessment orders is clear cut violation
      of the principles of natural justice.



 
e. In the judgment of 
Oryx Fisheries (P) Ltd. v. Union of India
, (2010) 13 SCC,
      the Hon'ble Apex Court has held the following, the relevant part has been
      reproduced hereunder-




28. S.R. Das, C.J. speaking for the unanimous Constitution Bench in Khem Chand
[AIR 1958 SC 300] held that the concept of "reasonable opportunity" includes
various safeguards and one of them, in the words of the learned Chief Justice, is:

(AIR p. 307, para 19)

"(a) An opportunity to deny his guilt and establish his innocence, which he can only
do if he is told what the charges levelled against him are and the allegations on
which such charges are based;"



29.Expressions like "a reasonable opportunity of making objection" or "a
reasonable opportunity of defence" have come up for consideration before this
Court in the context of several statutes. A Constitution Bench of this Court in 
Khem
Chand v. Union of India
 [AIR 1958 SC 300], of course in the context of service
jurisprudence, reiterated certain principles which are applicable in the present
case also.




33. The principle that justice must not only be done but it must eminently appear
to be done as well is equally applicable to quasi-judicial proceeding if such a
proceeding has to inspire confidence in the mind of those who are subject to it.



f. Furthermore, the Central Information Commission, New Delhi in Appeal No.
CIC/BS/A/2016/001441-BJ captioned as 'Ram Avtar Sharma Vs. CPIO & Asstt.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Circle-62(1) has also held the following:

                                         8


 10. Keeping in view the facts of the case and submissions made by both the
parties, the Commission directs the Respondent to provide the certified copies of
the order sheet relating to the Assessment Order passed in the matter, as
sought by the Appellant, within 15 days from the date of receipt of this order.

With regard to reasons/basis on which those orders were formulated, the
Commission observed that this information sought by him could not be defined as
'information' under 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 and hence is beyond the
purview of the aforesaid Act.



VIII. APPELLANT ALSO HAS THE RIGHT TO INSPECTION

   a. The Manual of Office Procedure, in three volumes, deals with the
      administrative aspects, composition and organization of the Income Tax
      Department. The work allocation and such personnel matters as
      departmental examinations, confidential reports, vigilance, training and the
      grievance redressal mechanism. Vol II deals with technical aspects,
      assessment procedures, widening of tax base, central information branches,
      refunds, recovery, write off, interest, penalties, prosecution, appeals and
      revisions. Vol III deals with miscellaneous subjects such as Authority for
      Advance Ruling. Settlement Commission, search and seizure, internal
      audit, revenue audit, inspection and important reports.



   b. 
Section 2 (j)
 right to information' means the right to information accessible
      under this Act which is held by or under the control of any public authority
      and includes the right to inspection of work, documents, records. It also
      includes the right to obtain certified copies.



   c. Even under the Rule 22 of Income Tax the applicant or the Commissioner or
      an authorised representative may be allowed to inspect the records of the
      case on making an application in writing to the Secretary provided that only
      those documents shall be allowed to be inspected which have been relied
      upon in the proceedings before the Authority. The inspection shall be
      allowed only in the presence of an officer of the Authority and the applicant
      may be permitted to make notes of inspection but not to take copies of any
      document.



                                        9


 d. Thus, the Statute and Rules provide that the Appellant has the right to inspect
the documents pertaining to the assessment proceedings. Thus, once statutorily
Appellant is empowered to inspect the records of the case. Thus, in view of 
Section
2(f)
 the right to obtain copies of the same can also not be denied, as it is
pertaining to his assessment proceedings only.



IX. Hence, CPIO and JDIT have failed to recognize the above principles. Thus, the
same are liable to be set aside and the information sought under the RTI
Application must be provided forthwith...."



The CPIO submitted that Respondent Public Authority being under the
administrative control of DGIT (Investigation) is an exempt organisation as per

Section 24
 of RTI Act. Thus, the Appellant was informed accordingly.



Decision:



The Commission upon a perusal of records finds no scope of any relief and is in
agreement with the reply of CPIO that Respondent Public Authority being under
the administrative control of DGIT(Investigation) is an exempt organization as per
Second Schedule of 
Section 24
 of the RTI Act. Further, the material on record does
not suggest any allegation of corruption or human rights violation in the matter,
for which reason, the Commission finds no reason to invoke the proviso to

Section 24(1)
 of the RTI Act to allow the disclosure of information, if any. For the
sake of clarity, the relevant provision of 
Section 24(1)
 is reproduced as under:



      "24. Act not to apply to certain organizations.--



(1) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the intelligence and security
organisations specified in the Second Schedule, being organisations established by
the Central Government or any information furnished by such organisations to
that Government: Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of
corruption and human rights violations shall not be excluded under this
sub-section:..."



In this context, the Commission is guided by a judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi High
Court in the matter of 
Dr. Neelam Bhalla vs Union Of India & Ors
 [W.P.(C)
83/2014] dated 03.02.2014, which held as under:


 
"4. Having heard learned counsel for the petitioner, this Court is of the view
that once the CIC has held that DRDO is an exempted organisation under 
Section

                                        10


24
 of RTI Act and the information sought does not pertain to corruption and/or
human rights violation, it was not open to the CIC to carve out any further
exemption...." [Emphasis Supplied
]

The said judgment
 was later upheld by a division bench of the Court in LPA
229/2014 on 11.03.2014.


In view of the above, the contentions raised by the Appellant are rendered
inconsequential.

                    The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                      Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )




Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                      11