[Cites 
39
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


K K Garg vs Chief Commissioner Of Income Tax (Cca) , ... on 13 January, 2020


                                       के ीय सूचना आयोग
                              Central Information Commission
                                    बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                               Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                                 नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

िशकायत सं या / Complaint No.:- CIC/CCITL/C/2018/169256-BJ

Mr. K. K. Garg

                                                                   .... िशकायतकता /Complainant
                                           VERSUS
                                            बनाम
CPIO
ITO (HQ), O/o the Pr. Commissioner of Income Tax - 2
Aayakar Bhawan, Sanjay Place, M. G. Road
Room No. 117, Agra - 282002
                                                                      ... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing       :                     30.12.2019
Date of Decision      :                     13.01.2020

Date of filing of RTI application                                        23.06.2018
CPIO's response                                                          27.07.2018 /
                                                                         23.10.2018
Date of filing the First appeal                                          04.08.2018
First Appellate Authority's response                                     14.09.2018
Date of diarised receipt of Complaint by the Commission                  27.11.2018

                                          ORDER

FACTS:



The Complainant vide his RTI application sought information on 11 points regarding the name &
residential address with date of joining of Pr. CIT,II Agra on transfer at Agra; make of assigned
staff car & Registration number; the certified copy of agreement between the "department" and
the "transport operator" in respect of assigned staff car; whether such assigned staff car was
being used for the purpose of commuting from residence to office and vice versa and other issues
related thereto.



The CPIO, O/o Pr. Commissioner of Income-Tax-2, Agra, vide its letter dated 27.07.2018 denied
disclosure of information
 u/s 8(1) (j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. Dissatisfied by the response of the
CPIO, the Complainant approached the FAA. The FAA, vide its order dated 14.09.2018 directed
the CPIO to pass a speaking order giving point wise reply to the Complainant on the basis of
available records and in accordance with the provisions of the 
RTI Act, 2005
. In case,
information on any one or more points was being denied, specific reasons for rejection as well as
relevant section of the 
RTI Act, 2005
, should be mentioned. Subsequently, the CPIO, vide its
letter dated 23.10.2018, in compliance with the direction given by the FAA, provided a point

                                                                                        Page 1 of 12

 wise response to the Complainant. The Complainant also requested for suitable compensation
and damage under 
Section 19 (8) (b)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 causing mental agony and harassment
in the process.



HEARING:

Facts emerging during the hearing:

The following were present:

Complainant: Mr. K. K. Garg through VC;

Respondent: Ms. Ashima Mahajan, ACIT, Agra and Mr. Tarun Singh Saini, ITO (Hqrs.), Agra
through VC;



The Complainant reiterated the contents of the RTI application and stated that the information on
points 02, 03, 09, 10 and 11 was not provided to him by the Respondent. He referred to point
No. 02 wherein he had requested for the make of the assigned staff car and its registration
number in respect of the Pr. CIT II Agra in response to which only the name of the car was
provided without the registration number. With regard to point No. 03, he submitted that 
Section
8 (1)
 was not applicable to the queries and that he was seeking the certified copy of the
agreement between the Department and the Transport Operator regarding staff car which should
have been disclosed since it was an agreement entered into by the Public Authority and the
Citizens had the right to know about the utilization of money spent through the Government
exchequer. The Complainant also referred to point No. 09, regarding recording of journeys in the
logbook in accordance with the staff car rules and point No. 10 regarding certified copy of the
logbook which were also not responded to his satisfaction. Furthermore, the Complainant
submitted that the name, address and mobile number of the driver was information kept in the
record of the public authority which should have been disclosed as per 
Section 4 (1) (b) (ix)
 of
the RTI Act, 2005. In its reply, the Respondent stated that with regard to point No. 02 no
specific registration number of the vehicle was recorded in the terms and conditions of the
contract entered into with the vendor hence the information could not be supplied. Regarding
point No. 03, the Respondent while referring to the decision of the Commission in R. K. Jain vs.
CPIO HUDCO Ltd. dated 01.09.2016 stated that the agreement was denied under 
Section 8 (1)

since it contained information which could adversely affect their trade secrets / intellectual
property rights etc. Regarding point No. 09, it was stated that the information held and available
with them was disclosed to the Complainant. As regards points No. 10 and 11 it was stated that
the logbook sought by the Appellant was exempted under 
Section 8 (1) (d)
 of the RTI Act, 2005
and the name, address and mobile number of the driver was his personal information exempted
under 
Section 8 (1) (j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. On being queried by the Commission regarding the
reasons why the information regarding the contract / agreement entered into by the Public
Authority with a private operator could not be disclosed after the finalization of the same, no
satisfactory response was offered by the Respondent. The Complainant consistently sought
compensation / damage under 
section 19 (8) (b)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, for the alleged harassment
and suffering caused to him.



The Commission was in receipt of a written submission from the Appellant dated 17.12.2019
where he submitted that the CPIO had deliberately failed to comply with the Commission's order
dated 14.09.2018 in furnishing information within reasonable time as the information on points
no. 2, 3, 9, 10, &11 was not supplied and only part information was supplied on 29.10.2018. 
In
support of his contention, the Appellant referred to the decisions of the Apex Court and various
High Courts in 
Jamia Milia Islamia v. Sh. IkramuddinW P(C) No.
 5677/2011, in the decision of

                                                                                       Page 2 of 12


Kashinath J ShetyeW.P. No. 1 of 2009, CBSE & Anr. v. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors.
 2011 (
8)
SCC 497, and State of UP v. Raj Narain
 1975 AIR 865. The Appellant thus prayed to initiate an
inquiry in respect of his complaint
 u/s 18(3)
 and 
18(4)
 of the Act, order the furnishing of the
correct information sought on points No. 2, 3, 9, 10 &11 within a fixed time limit, imposition of
penalty
 u/s 20(1)
, initiation of disciplinary action against the concerned delinquent CPIO under
CCS(Conduct) Rules read with 
Section20(2)
, and award appropriate compensation to him
 u/s
19(8)(b)
 of the RTI Act.




The Commission is also in receipt of a written submission on behalf of the Respondent dated Nil
wherein while providing point-by-point rebuttal to the contentions of the Appellant it was prayed
to dismiss the Complaint.



The Commission referred to the definition of information
 u/s 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 which is
reproduced below:

       "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-
       mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, report,
       papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and information
       relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other
       law for the time being in force."

Furthermore, a reference can also be made to the relevant extract of 
Section 2 (j)
 of the RTI Act,
2005 which reads as under:

       "(j) right to information" means the right to information accessible under this Act which
       is held by or under the control of any public authority and includes ........"

In this context a reference was made to the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in 2011 (8) SCC
497 (
CBSE Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay
), wherein it was held as under:


       35..... "It is also not required to provide 'advice' or 'opinion' to an applicant, nor
       required to obtain and furnish any 'opinion' or 'advice' to an applicant. The reference to
       'opinion' or 'advice' in the definition of 'information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only
       refers to such material available in the records of the public authority. Many public
       authorities have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and opinion to
       the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused with any obligation
       under the 
RTI Act
."

Furthermore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Khanapuram Gandaiah Vs. Administrative
Officer and Ors. Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.34868 OF 2009 (Decided on January 4, 2010)
had held as under:

       6. "....
Under the RTI Act
 "information" is defined under 
Section 2(f)
 which provides:

       "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-
       mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, report,
       papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and information
       relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other
       law for the time being in force."



                                                                                       Page 3 of 12


        This definition shows that an applicant under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act can get any
       information which is already in existence and accessible to the public authority under
       law. Of course, under the 
RTI Act
 an applicant is entitled to get copy of the opinions,
       advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he cannot ask for any information as to why such
       opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc. have been passed."

       7. "....the Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material which is not
       before him; or any information he could have obtained under law. Under 
Section 6
 of
       the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such information which can be accessed
       by the "public authority" under any other law for the time being in force. The answers
       sought by the petitioner in the application could not have been with the public authority
       nor could he have had access to this information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged
       to give any reasons as to why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was
       before him."

The Commission also observed that the information relating to the agreement entered into by the
Public Authority with a private operator regarding services of staff car should be suo motu
disclosed on the website of the Public Authority for the ease and convenience of the public at
large. In this context, the Commission observed that a voluntary disclosure of all information that
ought to be displayed in the public domain should be the rule and members of public who having
to seek information should be an exception. An open government, which is the cherished
objective of the 
RTI Act
, can be realised only if all public offices comply with proactive
disclosure norms. 
Section 4(2)
 of the RTI Act mandates every public authority to provide as
much information suo-motu to the public at regular intervals through various means of
communications, including the Internet, so that the public need not resort to the use of 
RTI Act
.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of 
CBSE and Anr. Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay
and Ors
 2011 (8) SCC 497 held as under:


       "37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and right to information
       are intended to be formidable tools in the hands of responsible citizens to fight corruption
       and to bring in transparency and accountability. The provisions of 
RTI Act
 should be
       enforced strictly and all efforts should be made to bring to light the necessary
       information under Clause (b) of 
Section 4(1)
 of the Act which relates to securing
       transparency and accountability in the working of public authorities and in discouraging
       corruption."

The Commission also observes the Hon'ble Delhi High Court ruling in WP (C) 12714/2009
Delhi Development Authority v. Central Information Commission and Another (delivered on:

21.05.2010), wherein it was held as under:

       "16.It also provides that the information should be easily accessible and to the extent
       possible should be in electronic format with the Central Public Information Officer or the
       State Public Information Officer, as the case may be. The word disseminate has also been
       defined in the explanation to mean - making the information known or communicating the
       information to the public through notice boards, newspapers, public announcements,
       media broadcasts, the internet, etc. It is, therefore, clear from a plain reading of 
Section
       4
 of the RTI Act that the information, which a public authority is obliged to publish under
       the said section should be made available to the public and specifically through the
       internet. There is no denying that the petitioner is duty bound by virtue of the provisions

                                                                                        Page 4 of 12

        of 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act to publish the information indicated in 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and
       
4(1)(c)
 on its website so that the public have minimum resort to the use of the 
RTI Act
 to
       obtain the information."

Furthermore, High Court of Delhi in the decision of 
General Manager Finance Air India Ltd &
Anr v. Virender Singh, LPA No.
 205/2012, Decided On: 16.07.2012 had held as under:


       "8. 
The RTI Act
, as per its preamble was enacted to enable the citizens to secure access
       to information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency
       and accountability in the working of every public authority. An informed citizenry and
       transparency of information have been spelled out as vital to democracy and to contain
       corruption and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities accountable to the
       governed. The said legislation is undoubtedly one of the most significant enactments of
       independent India and a landmark in governance. The spirit of the legislation is further
       evident from various provisions thereof which require public authorities to:

       A. Publish inter alia:

       i) the procedure followed in the decision making process;

       ii) the norms for the discharge of its functions;

       iii) rules, regulations, instructions manuals and records used by its employees in
       discharging of its functions;

       iv) the manner and execution of subsidy programmes including the amounts allocated
       and the details of beneficiaries of such programmes;

       v) the particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or authorizations granted. [see
       
Section 4(1) (b)
, (iii), (iv), (v); (xii) & (xiii)].

       B. Suo moto provide to the public at regular intervals as much information as possible
       [see 
Section 4(2)
]."

Moreover, in a series of judgements several high courts have allowed disclosure of contract
related information wherein the Government/ Public Authority is also one of the participant. The
relevant extracts of the decisions are mentioned as under:



The Hon'ble High Court of Madras in 
V.V. Mineral v. Director of Geology and Mining, Writ
Petition (MD) No.5427/2007
 dated 25/06/2007 held as under:




       "11.Therefore, the principal contention that a right accrues to the petitioner to object
       may be correct in the context if a document is exclusively submitted by any person to the
       Government authorities such as property statements, income tax returns etc., but in a
       case of lease deeds and transport permits which emanate from the statutory authorities
       and where the petitioner cannot be said to be in exclusive possession, he cannot have a
       right to object to its being divulged as a third party. The lease deeds pertaining to
       minerals as well as transport permits are not documents prepared or to be kept by a
       prospecting mine operator but prospecting a mine or mineral is a privilege conferred by
       the State to the individuals, who accepts the norms prescribed under Mines and Minerals
       Act 1957 and the rules framed thereunder.

                                                                                      Page 5 of 12


        12. In the present case, when the third respondent as an Information Officer, ordering
       notice to the petitioner and taking their objection and refusing to furnish the documents
       sought for by a citizen is clearly beyond the scope of the 
RTI Act
. If the information is
       available with the State and such information is in exclusive custody of the State, the
       question of seeking any opinion from the third party on such issues may not arise
       especially, when they are public documents. By disclosure of such information, no
       privilege or business interests of the petitioner are affected. On the other hand, such a
       disclosure may help any party to act upon those documents and take appropriate steps."



The aforesaid observation of the Hon'ble High Court of Madras was upheld in the decision of the
Hon'ble High Court of Nagpur in Sunflag Iron & Steel Company Ltd. V. State Information
Commission Writ Petition No. 863/ 2012 dated 14.11.2014 wherein, the following was held:



       "10. After hearing the learned advocates for the respective parties and considering the
       judgments referred above, in my view, it cannot be said that in each and every case the
       notice under 
Section 19(4)
 of the Act of 2005 is required to be issued to third party and
       hearing is to be afforded to the third party before any directions for supplying the
       information are given. The Division Bench of Delhi High Court has considered the
       scope of 
Section 11(1)
 of the Act of 2005 and has laid down that the notice is required
       to be given to third party in case information prima facie is considered as confidential
       and if it affects the rights of privacy of the third party.



       12. If the impugned order is examined in the light of the above referred judgments, it has
       to be held that the directions given by the Commission to provide the information as
       sought vide Item no.5 of the application given by the respondent no.1 cannot be said to be
       an information which can be considered as confidential and in the exclusive possession
       of the petitioner, it being a Memorandum of Understanding to which the Government of
       Maharashtra is a party. However, the information sought by the respondent no.4 vide
       Item No.4 of his application, cannot be provided to the respondent no.4 without hearing
       the petitioner and considering its objections. The information sought by the respondent
       no.4 vide Item no.4 of his application, does not specify the documents in respect of which
       the information is sought and the directions to provide the information on such vague
       request may prejudice the petitioner.



       13. The reliance placed on behalf of the petitioner on the judgment given in the case of
       R.K. Jain V/s. Union of India & Anr. (cited supra) is misdirected inasmuch as in this
       case, the information sought related to the annual confidential reports of the third party
       which objected to the providing of the information. In the judgment given in the case of
       Surupsingh Hrya Naik V/s. State of Maharashtra & Ors. (cited supra) again the issue
       was about giving of information relating to the hospital records. In the judgment given in
       the case of SKIL Infrastructure Private Limited & Anr. V/s. State Information
       Commissioner & Ors. (cited supra) the issue about supplying the information which was
       not exclusively in the custody of the third party and which related to the transactions of
       the State Government, did not fall for consideration.



       The judgments relied on behalf of the petitioner do not assist the petitioner. As far as
       the facts of the present case are concerned, information sought by the respondent no.4

                                                                                      Page 6 of 12

        vide item no.5 of his application is concerning the Memorandum of Understanding to
       which the Government of Maharashtra is party and it cannot be said that the
       information is exclusively related to the petitioner. The directions issued by the
       Commission to provide the information to the respondent no.4 sought vide Item no.5 of
       his application cannot be faulted with."



The Commission finds that the decision of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in 
Jamia Millia
Islamia v. Ikramuddin WP (C) No.
 5677/2011 dated 22.11.2011, quoted by the appellant, is also
pertinent to this matter wherein it was observed that:




       "The act of entering into an agreement with any other person/entity by a public authority
       would be a public activity, and as it would involve giving or taking of consideration,
       which would entail involvement of public funds, the agreement would also involve public
       interest. Every citizen is entitled to know on what terms the Agreement/settlement has
       been reached by the petitioner public authority with any other entity or individual."



The Commission also draws reference to the judgment of the Division bench of Jharkhand High
Court, in 
State of Jharkhand v. Navin Kumar Sinhga and Anr.
, AIR 2008 Jharkhand 19 dated
08/08/2007, held as under:




       "26........The question therefore that falls for consideration is as to whether disclosure of
       various documents submitted by the bidders is a trade secret or commercial confidence
       or intellectual property. Prima facie, we are of the view that once a decision is taken in
       the matter of grant of tender, there is no justification to keep it secret. People have a
       right to know the basis on which the decision has been taken. If tenders are invited by the
       public authority and on the basis of tender documents, the eligibility of a tenderor or a
       bidder is decided, then those tender documents cannot be secret, that too, after the tender
       is decided and work order is issued on the ground that it will amount to disclosure of
       trade secret or commercial confidence. If the authorities of Government refuse to
       disclose the document, the very purpose of the Act will be frustrated. Moreover,
       disclosure of information, sought for by the petitioner, cannot and shall not be a trade
       secret or commercial confidence; rather disclosure of such information shall be in public
       interest, inasmuch as it will show the transparency in the activities of the Government.



       27. ......... Since the tender process is completed and contract has been awarded, it will
       not influence the contract. Besides the above, a citizen has a right to know the
       genuineness of a document submitted by the tenderer in the matter of grant of tender for
       consultancy work or for any other work. As noticed above, the tender process is
       completed and the contract has been awarded, therefore, it will not influence the
       contract. In any view of the matter, the document in question cannot be treated as trade
       secret or commercial confidence. In our considered opinion a contract entered into by
       the public authority with a private person cannot be treated as confidential after
       completion of contract."



Furthermore, para 1.1.1 of O.M. No. No.1/6/2011-IR issued by the DoPT on issue of guidelines
regarding implementation of suo motu disclosure under 
section 4
 of RTI Act, 2005 states as
under


                                                                                       Page 7 of 12

        "1.1.1 Information relating to procurement made by Public Authorities including
       publication of notice/tender enquiries, corrigenda thereon, and details of bid awards
       detailing the name of the supplier of goods/services being procured or the works
       contracts entered or any such combination of these and the rate and total amount at
       which such procurement or works contract is to be done should be disclosed. All
       information disclosable as per Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure's O.M.
       No 10/1/2011-PPC dated 30th November, 2011 on Mandatory Publication of Tender
       Enquiries on the Central Public Procurement Portal and O.M. No. 10/3/2012- PPC
       dated 30th March, 2012 on Implementation of comprehensive end-to-end e-procurement
       should be disclosed under 
Section 4
. At present the limit is fixed at Rs. 10.00 lakhs. In
       case of procurements made through DGS&D Rate Contracts or through Kendriya
       Bhandar/ NCCF, only award details need to be published. However information about
       procurement which fall within the purview of 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act would be exempt."



The RTI Act, 2005
 was enacted to ensure greater and effective access of information and
progressive and meaningful participation of all concerned. . The preamble also inter alia states
"... democracy requires an informed citizenry and transparency of information which are vital to
its functioning and also to contain corruption and to hold Governments and their
instrumentalities accountable to the governed." The Commission finds that every action of the
government must be actuated in public interest and for larger public good. When a public
authority is largely funded by the government, a citizen has every right to know about the
investments carried out by the public entity in the larger interest of the public.



The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
Bihar Public Service Commission v. Saiyed
Hussain Abbas Rizwi
: (2012) 13 SCC 61 while explaining the term "Public Interest" held:


 
"22. The expression "public interest" has to be understood in its true connotation so as to
       give complete meaning to the relevant provisions of the Act. The expression "public
       interest" must be viewed in its strict sense with all its exceptions so as to justify denial of
       a statutory exemption in terms of the Act. In its common parlance, the expression "public
       interest", like "public purpose", is not capable of any precise definition. It does not have
       a rigid meaning, is elastic and takes its colour from the statute in which it occurs, the
       concept varying with time and state of society and its needs (
State of Bihar v. Kameshwar
       Singh
([AIR 1952 SC 252]). It also means the general welfare of the public that warrants
       recognition and protection; something in which the public as a whole has a stake
       [Black's Law Dictionary (8th Edn.)]."




The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
Ashok Kumar Pandey vs The State Of West Bengal

(decided on 18 November, 2003Writ Petition (crl.) 199 of 2003) had made reference to the
following texts for defining the meaning of "public interest', which is stated as under:




       "Strouds Judicial Dictionary, Volume 4 (IV Edition),'Public Interest' is defined thus:

       "Public Interest (1) a matter of public or general interest does not mean that which is
       interesting as gratifying curiosity or a love of information or amusement but that in
       which a class of the community have a pecuniary interest, or some interest by which their
       legal rights or liabilities are affected."

       In Black's Law Dictionary (Sixth Edition), "public interest" is defined as follows :



                                                                                          Page 8 of 12


        Public Interest something in which the public, or some interest by which their legal rights
       or liabilities are affected. It does not mean anything the particular localities, which may
       be affected by the matters in question. Interest shared by national government...."



In 
Mardia Chemical Limited v. Union of India
 (2004) 4 SCC 311, the Hon'ble Supreme Court
of India while considering the validity of 
SARFAESI Act
 and recovery of non-performing assets
by banks and financial institutions in India, recognised the significance of Public Interest and had
held as under :


In Mardia Chemical Limited v. Union of India MANU/SC/0323/2004 : (2004) 4 SCC 311,
wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India while considering the validity of 
SARFAESI Act

and recovery of non-performing assets by banks and financial institutions in India, had held as
under :

        ".............it may be observed that though the transaction may have a character of a
        private contract yet the question of great importance behind such transactions as a whole
        having far reaching effect on the economy of the country cannot be ignored, purely
        restricting it to individual transactions more particularly when financing is through
        banks and financial institutions utilizing the money of the people in general namely, the
        depositors in the banks and public money at the disposal of the financial institutions.
        Therefore, wherever public interest to such a large extent is involved and it may become
        necessary to achieve an object which serves the public purposes, individual rights may
        have to give way. Public interest has always been considered to be above the private
        interest. Interest of an individual may, to some extent, be affected but it cannot have the
        potential of taking over the public interest having an impact in the socio-economic drive
        of the country..........."

However, with regard to seeking the personal information of employees, the Commission
referred to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of Canara Bank Rep.
by its Deputy Gen. Manager v. C.S. Shyam, Civil Appeal No. 22 of 2009 dated 31.08.2017
wherein it was held as under:



       "5) The information was sought on 15 parameters with regard to various aspects of
       transfers of clerical staff and staff of the Bank with regard to individual employees. This
       information was in relation to the personal details of individual employee such as the
       date of his/her joining, designation, details of promotion earned, date of his/her joining
       to the Branch where he/she is posted, the authorities who issued the transfer orders etc.
       etc


       11) Having heard the learned counsel for the appellant and on perusal of the record of
       the case, we are inclined to allow the appeal, set aside the impugned order and dismiss
       the application submitted by the 1st respondent under 
Section 6
 of the Act.



 
12) In our considered opinion, the issue involved herein remains no more res integra and
       stands settled by two decisions of this Court in 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande vs.
       Central Information Commissioner & Ors.
, (2013) 1 SCC 212 and R.K. Jain vs. Union of
       India & Anr., (2013) 14 SCC 794, 5 it may not be necessary to re-examine any legal issue
       urged in this appeal.




       14) In our considered opinion, the aforementioned principle of law applies to the facts of
       this case on all force. It is for the reasons that, firstly, the information sought by

                                                                                         Page 9 of 12

        respondent No.1 of individual employees working in the Bank was personal in nature;

       secondly, it was exempted from being disclosed under 
Section 8(j)
 of the Act and lastly,
       neither respondent No.1 disclosed any public interest much less larger public interest
       involved in seeking such information of the individual employee and nor any finding was
       recorded by the Central Information Commission and the High Court as to the
       involvement of any larger public interest in supplying such information to respondent
       No.1."



Furthermore, in a recent judgment dated 13.11.2019 in Civil Appeal No. 10044 OF 2010 with Civil
Appeal No. 10045 OF 2010 and Civil Appeal No. 2683 of 2010, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India, had observed as under:



       "59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion, would indicate that personal
       records, including name, address, physical, mental and psychological status, marks obtained,
       grades and answer sheets, are all treated as personal information. Similarly, professional
       records, including qualification, performance, evaluation reports, ACRs, disciplinary
       proceedings, etc. are all personal information. Medical records, treatment, choice of
       medicine, list of hospitals and doctors visited, findings recorded, including that of the family
       members, information relating to assets, liabilities, income tax returns, details of investments,
       lending and borrowing, etc. are personal information. Such personal information is entitled to
       protection from unwarranted invasion of privacy and conditional access is available when
       stipulation of larger public interest is satisfied. This list is indicative and not exhaustive."



The Hon'ble High Court of Sikkim in the matter of Sancha Bahadur Subba vs. State of Sikkim
W.P. (C) 31/2017 dated 30.04.2018 had held as under:

       "30. What concludes therefore from the gamut of discussions herein above is that in a
       given case information pertaining to assets and liabilities can be disclosed with the rider
       that there must be larger public interest involved justifying such disclosure. As can be
       culled out from the averments and submissions, the Petitioner herein suspects that the
       Respondent No. 5 is in possession of assets disproportionate to his known sources of
       income, however mere suspicion without any prima facie material to substantiate it does
       not justify the disclosure of such information of the Respondent No. 5 as rests with the
       concerned government authority. This situation indeed appears to be a fishing expedition
       embarked upon by the Petitioner without any bona fide public interest."



With regard to the imposition of penalty on the CPIO/PIO under Section 20 of the RTI Act,
2005, the Commission took note of the ruling of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in W.P.(C)
11271/2009 Registrar of Companies & Ors v. Dharmendra Kumar Garg & Anr. (delivered on:

01.06.2012) wherein it was held:



          " 61. Even if it were to be assumed for the sake of argument, that the view taken by the
         learned Central Information Commissioner in the impugned order was correct, and
         that the PIOs were obliged to provide the information, which was otherwise retrievable
         by the querist by resort to 
Section 610
 of the Companies Act, it could not be said that
         the information had been withheld malafide or deliberately without any reasonable
         cause. It can happen that the PIO may genuinely and bonafidely entertain the belief
         and hold the view that the information sought by the querist cannot be provided for one


                                                                                           Page 10 of 12

          or the other reasons. Merely because the CIC eventually finds that the view taken by
         the PIO was not correct, it cannot automatically lead to issuance of a showcause notice
         under 
Section 20
 of the RTI Act and the imposition of penalty. The legislature has
         cautiously provided that only in cases of malafides or unreasonable conduct, i.e., where
         the PIO, without reasonable cause refuses to receive the application, or provide the
         information, or knowingly gives incorrect, incomplete or misleading information or
         destroys the information, that the personal penalty on the PIO can be imposed. This
         was certainly not one such case. If the CIC starts imposing penalty on the PIOs in every
         other case, without any justification, it would instill a sense of constant apprehension in
         those functioning as PIOs in the public authorities, and would put undue pressure on
         them. They would not be able to ful fill their statutory duties under the 
RTI Act
 with an
         independent mind and with objectivity. Such consequences would not auger well for the
         future development and growth of the regime that the 
RTI Act
 seeks to bring in, and
         may lead to skewed and imbalanced decisions by the PIOs Appellate Authorities and
         the CIC. It may even lead to unreasonable and absurd orders and bring the institutions
         created by the 
RTI Act
 in disrepute."



Similarly, the following observation of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in 
Bhagat Singh v. CIC &
Ors. WP(C
) 3114/2007 are pertinent in this matter:




       "17. This Court takes a serious note of the two year delay in releasing information, the
       lack of adequate reasoning in the orders of the Public Information Officer and the
       Appellate Authority and the lack of application of mind in relation to the nature of
       information sought. The materials on record clearly show the lackadaisical approach of
       the second and third respondent in releasing the information sought. However, the
       Petitioner has not been able to demonstrate that they malafidely denied the information
       sought. Therefore, a direction to the Central Information Commission to initiate action
       under 
Section 20
 of the Act, cannot be issued."



Furthermore, the High Court of Delhi in the decision of Col. 
Rajendra Singh v. Central
Information Commission and Anr. WP (C
) 5469 of 2008 dated 20.03.2009 had held as under:




       "
Section 20
, no doubt empowers the CIC to take penal action and direct
       payment of such compensation or penalty as is warranted. Yet the Commission has to be
       satisfied that the delay occurred was without reasonable cause or the request was denied
       malafidely.



       ......The preceding discussion shows that at least in the opinion of this Court, there are
       no allegations to establish that the information was withheld malafide or unduly delayed
       so as to lead to an inference that petitioner was responsible for unreasonably
       withholding it."

The Commission also observed that the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of R.K. Jain
v. V.P. Pandey, CPIO, CESTAT, New Delhi in W.P. (C) No. 4785/ 2017 dated 10.10.2017
adjudicated on the correctness of an order of the Commission dated 17.04.2017 whereby the
Respondent was cautioned to exercise due care in future and to ensure that correct and complete
information is furnished to the RTI applicants. It was decided that:



                                                                                        Page 11 of 12


        "2. The grievance of the petitioner is that although the CIC had accepted that there was a
       delay in providing the necessary information to the petitioner, the CIC had not imposed
       the penalty as required under 
Section 20(1)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005. It is
       well settled that imposing of the penalty is a discretionary measure. 
In 
Anand
       Bhushan v. R.A. Haritash
: ILR (2012) 4 Delhi 657 a division bench of this Court had
       considered the question whether the levy of penalty was discretionary and held as
       under..........




       3. In this case it is apparent that the CIC had in its discretion considered that a order
       cautioning the CPIO would be sufficient. This Court is not inclined to interfere with such
       exercise of discretion."



Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court in the matter of 
R.K. Jain v. CIC and Anr.
 in W.P.(C)
4152/2017 dated 10.10.2017 had held as under:




 
"5. The question whether the CIC had the discretion to restrict the penalty or whether
       penalty as provided under 
Section 20
 of the Act is mandatory, is no longer res integra.
       The said question was considered by a Division Bench of this Court in 
Anand Bhushan v.
       R.A. Haritash
: ILR (2012) 4 Delhi 657 and the relevant extract of 
the said decision
 is set
       out below....


       6. In view of the above, this Court finds no reason to interfere with the discretion
       exercised by the CIC. The petition is, accordingly, dismissed."



DECISION:



Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by both the parties and in the
light of the decisions cited above, the Commission instructs the Respondent to disclose the copy
of the agreement entered into with the transport operator as sought in point No. 03 of the RTI
application within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt of this order.



The Complaint stands disposed accordingly.



                                                                 (Bimal Julka) (िबमल जु का)
                                                   (Information Commissioner) (सूचना आयु )

Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स ािपत ित)




(K.L. Das) (के .एल.दास)
(Dy. Registrar) (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26182598/ 
[email protected]

 दनांक / Date: 13.01.2020



                                                                                     Page 12 of 12