[Cites 
16
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Bhagyesh Joshi vs Reserve Bank Of India on 10 October, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबा गंगनाथ माग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई  द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/RBIND/A/2022/101377

Bhagyesh Joshi
(HDFC Bank Ltd.)                                          ......अपीलकता /Appellant

                                       VERSUS
                                        बनाम

CPIO,
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Supervision, Centre-1
World Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade
Colaba, Mumbai-400005                                  .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                    :   04/09/2023
Date of Decision                   :   03/10/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :             Saroj Punhani

(Note: The Appellant is a third-party Bank and has filed the instant appeal against
the order of disclosure issued by the FAA, RBI)

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on           :   23/08/2019
CPIO replied on                    :   23/07/2021
First appeal filed on              :   17/09/2021
First Appellate Authority order    :   08/10/2021
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated         :   11/01/2022

Information sought
:

The RTI Applicant, Harjinder Singh filed an RTI application dated 26.04.2019 seeking
the following information:-

                                         1


    1- "दे श के शीष 100 बक िडफा   र के नाम, पते, फम, इनके ारा िलये गये कज
      की मूल रािश + िलये गये कज पर दे य ाज रािश कुल दे य रािश की जानकारी
      दे ।

   2- दे श के ऐसे बक िडफा रो की कुल सं'ा बताये िज(ोने बै  को से एक करोड
      या एक करोड से +ादा का कज ले रखा है    ।"



While replying to a notice dated 23.08.2019 of RBI issued under Section 11(1) & (2)
of the 
RTI Act
 to the Respondent Bank, the following contentions were submitted
by the Appellant Bank vide their letter dated 23.10.2019:



       "2. At the outset, we submit that the information sought by the RTI Applicant
lacks clarity and the said Application is vague, indistinct and ambiguous. It is trite
law that any query made under the Act must be clear, cogent and unambiguous. 
In
case of 
Harjinder Dhingra V. State Bank of India
 (2013 SCC Online CIC 3144], the
Hon'ble Central Information Commission dismissed the appeal of an RTI applicant,
as the query posed to the public authority was unclear, vague and ambiguous.
Furthermore, it is submitted that a public authority is obligated to only share such
information that is available with it/ held by it and is under no obligation to collate
or look for information sought by an RTI applicant.
 In the case of Central Board of
Secondary Education V. Aditya Bandhopadhay ((2011) 8 SCC 497). the Hon'ble
Supreme Court held that where the information sought in not part of the record of
a public authority or where such information is not required to be maintained under
any law, rules or regulations of the public authority, the Act does not cast any
obligation upon the public authority to collate or collect such non-available
information and then furnish to the applicant.



        3. In the instant case, the queries made by the Applicant are vague and
ambiguous as it neither specifies the time period nor the name of the banks to which
it relates. Moreover, the Reserve Bank of India['RBI'] does not maintain a list of all
loan defaulters and accordingly, will be required to access data shared by all banks
and collate the same to provide information to the Applicant. Therefore, in light of
the foregoing, the information sought in the Application ought to be refused at the
threshold itself.



      4. Notwithstanding the above, we submit that the information sought by the
Application is exempt from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(d)
, 
8(1)(h)
 and 
8(1X)
 of the
RTI Act and accordingly, no information ought to be shared by you with the
Applicant.



                                          2


         5. It is submitted that a bank is nothing but a repository of data/information
of its customers/clients which it gathers/ collates on an ongoing basis. The banking
business is largely based on trust and confidence. Thus, disclosure of such personal/
sensitive information, more so without the consent of such customers/ clients, shall
result in breach of customer trust in us and consequently shall cause commercial
harm to us. Moreover, there is no public interest in disclosure of the Information
sought by the RTI Applicant. In fact, Hon'ble Central Information Commission in
Amitava Choudhury v. CP10 [2018 SCC OnLine CIC 8099] has held that there is no
public interest in disclosure of defaulters' information. Thus, we submit that the
information sought in the Application is exempt from disclosure under 
Section
8(1)(d)
 of the Act.



       6. The information sought by the Applicant is also exempt from disclosure
under 
section 8(1) (1)
 of the Act since the information sought by the Applicant
pertains to the bank's customers' information and has no nexus with the public
interest and moreover it can lead to far reaching consequences. The information
held by the bank are on strict confidentially basis and in a fiduciary capacity.
Pertinently, the information related to loan etc. is an unpublished sensitive
information. The disclosure of the information sought by the Applicant would not
only breach the privacy of the bank's customers but also lead to consequences,
without prejudice to the foregoing, it is further submitted that our customers are
per say fourth party vis-à-vis the RBL Whilst the Act contemplates a mechanism for
disclosing information in relation to third party, in absence of any mechanism, the
information relating to such fourth parties will be disclosed in deprivation of their
right to object to such disclosure and hence, such disclosure will not only be an
infringement of right to privacy of our customers but will also be in violation of the
principles of natural justice. Thus, it is submitted that the information sought is
exempt from disclosure under 
Section 3(1)
() of the Act.



       7. Beside the above, it appears that the source of the information proposed
to be disclosed is obtained from the CRILC Return. As per 
Section 45E
 of the RBI Act,
and 
section 28
 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 sharing of this data outside the
banking system is prohibited


      8. Further, there is an implied contract between us and our customers and
therefore we are under obligation to maintain confidentiality of such information
and no such information can be divulged/ disclosed to third parties except under
circumstances well defined under the said statutes...."



                                          3


 Subsequently, the CPIO, RBI vide letter dated 23.07.2021 issued a Notice under

Section 11(3)
 of the RTI Act to the Appellant Bank stating as under:



       "Please refer to our letter DBS.CO.RIA.2214/01.12.001/2019-20 (Vol. 9)
dated October 09, 2019 wherein we had issued a notice under 
section 11(1)
 read
with 
section 11(2)
 of the Right to lnformation Act, 2005 with respect to captioned
RTI request to enable you to make a written submission as to whether the
information may be disclosed or not along with reasons for exemption from
disclosure under any clause of 
RTI Act, 2005
.

       2. After considering your response dated 23.10.2019 to the above notice, we
intend to disclose the details of top 100 bank defaulters as on March 31, 2019 to
the applicant."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 17.09.2021 largely
contending on the points raised in their objection letter of 23.10.2019 and
emphasizing that- "it has filed a Writ Petition being Writ Petition(C) No. 1159 of
2019 inter alia challenging disclosure of vital information of the Appellant including
inspection reports by the RBI under the 
RTI Act
. The said Writ Petition filed by the
Bank is pending hearing and final disposal before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
lndia. Thus, the issue of disclosing such vital information of the Appellant is sub
judice before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of lndia and therefore information sought
by the RTI Applicant ought not to be disclosed, atleast till the decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court."



The FAA vide order dated 08.10.2021 upheld the reply of the CPIO and stated inter
alia as under:



        "8. In order to withhold any information sought by applicants under 
RTI Act
,
such information should fall within any of the exempted items under 
Section 8
 and

9
 of the RTI Act. If any part of requested information qualifies for exemption, CPIO
would be free to sever/blackout such part and provide the information. It would not
be possible to claim the exemption from disclosure under Section 8(1) (a), (d) and

(e) in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Reserve Bank of India & Ors. v.

Jayantilal N. Mistry & Ors., (2016) 3 SCC 525.



      9. The exemption under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 is available in respect of "personal
information" of an individual. The word 'personal information used in 
section 8(1)
)
may not cover the information relating to a body corporate. If the information
includes details of "individuals", the same may be an exempted information under

Section 8(1)
) of the 
RTI Act, 2005
.

                                           4


         10. In view of the aforesaid observations, I find no merit in the appeal which
is liable to be dismissed as such. Further, the provisions of 
RTI Act, 2005
 do not
contemplate a mandatory personal hearing to be given to the appellant by the First
Appellate Authority. The contentions/grounds of the appellant contained in this
appeal have been taken into consideration, while passing this order. In these
circumstances, it is not considered to be necessary to provide a separate personal
hearing to the appellant."



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present: -

Appellant: Advocate Aayesh Gandhi present through video conference.
Respondent: Sangeeta Sheoran, Manager & Rep. of CPIO present through video
conference.

RTI Applicant: Not present.



The Commission heard the Advocate of the Appellant at length extrapolating on
the same lines as that of the contentions contained in the above-mentioned
objection letter dated 23.10.2019 as well as their First Appeal.



The Rep. of CPIO reiterated the CPIO's decision to disclose the information and the
observations of the FAA.



Decision:



The bench has considered the submissions of both the parties, most of which has
been time and again reiterated before this bench in various similar appeals filed by
various other Banks, to which the Appellant and the CPIO are rather privy to. As
held through various previous orders, the decision of the coordinate bench of the
Commission in the matter of various third-party banks vs. RBI vide File No.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 that covers a detailed
discussion inter alia on the reliance placed by RBI on the Jayantilal Mistry case; the
pendency of the averred Writ petition before the Apex Court is applicable to the
instant case as well. Suffice to say that the issues raised in the instant case are
encapsulated in that same discussion of the coordinate bench in the following
manner:



                                          5


          "39. A comprehensive view has to be taken on the objection filed by the
institutions. These objectives has to be deliberated and adjudicated in the light of
Jayantilal Mistry's case and other judicial pronouncements relevant in such matter,
some of which have been referred by the Commission in the above parts as well.

The Commission while examining various objections realize that the Writ Petitions
filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is seeking directions of the Supreme
Court for non-disclosure of certain aspects of these audit/inspection report and any
such guidance in these Writ Petitions will have direct bearing and provide further
clarity to the CPIO/FAA in adjudicating various aspects of disclosure/non-disclosure
of reports or the information/data which are part of these reports under the
provisions of the 
RTI Act
. The Commission takes note that all the cases/second
appeals filed herein are based on interpretations of RBI Vs. Jayantilal Mistry case
and other relevant judicial pronouncements requesting for full disclosure vis-à-vis
with exemptions under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act for non-disclosure of full or parts
of these reports.

         40. In view of the above observations, the Commission is of the view that the
reports generated in the hands of regulatory public authority in discharge of its
statutory obligations are information under 
Section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act, as the
regulator and the regulated entities are not governed by fiduciary relationship. The
orders of the Commission to their effect has been upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Jayantilal Mistry's case and the position is unchanged even today. Various
objections filed by banks/financial institutions, to be examined, analyzed and
adjudicated upon, are related to various data and information submitted to the
Reserve Bank of India by these financial institutions explaining their operations,
commercial decisions, clients data etc. under statutory obligations can be disclosed
as such. There are apparently two set of such information which have been shared
by the institutions with the regulator under statutory obligation. First is the
information/data of clients relating to their business/commercial operations,
financial transactions, business and commercial strategy which is shared by clients
with financial institutions in full trust and confidence and is held by them in fiduciary
capacity, protected from disclosure under the 
RTI Act
 in their hands. Second set is
the information relating to business strategy, decisions, transactions, other
operational data etc. of financial institutions have been bearing on their
competitive position which also enjoys the exemption from disclosure in their hands,
if it is a public authority or otherwise, under the 
RTI Act
. Some of such data, on case
to case basis be sensitive enough for protection of national interest. The
Commission is of the view that the protection of disclosure of information under

Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of financial institutions does not
evaporate once such data/information is shared, in good faith and trust, with the
regulator under statutory obligation. Various observations of Hon'ble Supreme

                                           6

 Court in Jayantilal Mistry's case also does not indicate so and decision of the
regulator to consider redacting such data/information while disclosing the reports
is aligned with this and other judicial pronouncements of Supreme Court and High
Courts.

       41. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of the
CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care has
to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making reasoned
order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and later in the hands
of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be required to adjudicate
such RTI applications in the light of the observations of the Commission afresh. The
Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various objections filed by
the Banks and Financial Institutions and submissions made by applicant to reach
the decision in favour or against redaction of various parts of the report on case to
case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal
Mistry case and other relevant judgments, some of which have been referred in this
order as well. Hence, with these observations the orders passed by the CPIO and
FAA in these matters are set aside and the cases are being remanded to the CPIO
for adjudication afresh. (Emphasis Supplied)

       42. It is amply clear that Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and
others tagged are admitted in Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein guidance and
direction has been sought on non-disclosure of certain type of information which
are essentially the part of the Annual Inspection Report/RAR, etc. These petitions
also seek protection of interim communication between regulator and the
regulated entity in the process of finalization of these reports or otherwise. It is
obvious that decision in these Writ Petitions will provide clarity and guidance to the
Public Authority on redaction/non-disclosure of a set of information inspite of being
part of these reports which are open to disclosure. At this stage, any decision by the
Public Authority will amount to pre-judging the issues pending admitted Writ
Petitions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Various banks, financial institutions,
respondent public authority and the RTI applicant have already impleaded party
and are presenting their arguments before the Apex Court.

       43. Hence, any decision of redaction or disclosure of information, without
waiting for decision in the Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged may cause irrevocable damage against right of privacy and protection of
commercial interest. Hence, the respondent public authority if expedient may wait
for the outcome in Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others tagged
or seek clarification from the Hon'ble Court and accordingly decide these RTI
applications by following process as enumerated in the earlier paras by the
Commission in the interest of principles of natural justice. While disclosing the
information they should be cautious in taking a considerate view balancing right to

                                          7

 privacy, protection of national and commercial interest on one hand vis-à-vis larger
public interest. (Emphasis Supplied)

 
44. It is further observed that similar view has also been taken by the Division
Bench of the Commission in file bearing nos. CIC/VS/A/2013/001488 and
CIC/VS/A/2013/001805 dated 11.05.2017 wherein the Commission observed that
'Having considered the submissions of both the parties, the Commission observes
that since a similar issue is pending adjudication before the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in the matter of Central for 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. &Ors.
, it would be judicious to await the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court. However, on receipt of the final outcome
from the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter, the appellant shall be at liberty to
file second appeal afresh, if he so desires. The instant appeals are disposed of'."




Having observed as above, the stipulations contained in para 41 & 43 to which
emphasis has been supplied as above stands endorsed to the Respondent CPIO
in the instant case as well.



                       The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                     Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                            हािन)
                                           Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                           8