[Cites 
7
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Piyush Avinash Luktuke vs Institute Of Companies Secretaries Of ... on 9 May, 2022


Author: 
Vanaja N Sarna


Bench: 
Vanaja N Sarna


                            क य सुचना आयोग
                    CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
                             बाबा गंगनाथ माग
                            Baba Gangnath Marg
                        मुिनरका, नई द ली - 110067
                        Munirka, New Delhi-110067

                                        File no.: - CIC/ICSOI/A/2020/695970

In the matter of
Piyush Avinash Luktuke
                                                                ... Appellant
                                        VS
1. Central Public Information Officer
The Institute of Companies Secretaries of India (ICSI)
3rd Floor, C-36, Sector -62 Rd, C- Block,
Phase -2, Industrial Area, Sector -62, Noida - 201 301

2. Central Public Information Officer
ICSI House, 22 Institutional Area,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi - 110 003
                                                                ...Respondents


RTI application filed on          :     05/07/2020
CPIO replied on                   :     12/08/2020
First appeal filed on             :     16/08/2020
First Appellate Authority order   :     14/09/2020
Second Appeal Filed on            :     12/12/2020
Date of Hearing                   :     04/05/2022
Date of Decision                  :     04/05/2022

The following were present:
Appellant: Present over VC

Respondent: Sai Dutta Mishra, Director and CPIO; Advocate Sandeep
Chatterjee; Advocate Anurag Mehta; present over VC at CIC
Information Sought:

The appellant has sought the following information

1. Number of registered members of ICSI who are required to undergo/
complete (Programme Credit Hours) PCH for the year 2017-2020 till
06.07.2020.



                                         1


 2. Number of Registered Members of ICSI who have completed PCH
(Programme Credit Hours) for the block of 2017-2020 till 06.07.2020.

3. Extracts of Minutes of Council Meeting of ICSI at which ICSI (Continuous
Professional Education) Guidelines, 2019, were approved.

4. And other related information.

Grounds for filing Second Appeal:

The CPIO did not provide the desired information.
Submissions made by Appellant and Respondent during Hearing:

The appellant submitted that he is not satisfied with the information provided
to him.

The CPIO submitted that a suitable reply was provided to the appellant. He
further reiterated the written submissions dated 02.05.2022, in which he
submitted that the appellant requested for five documents/details. He further
submitted that three points were rejected by the CPIO as the same were not
falling under the definition of "information" as defined
 u/s 2(f)
 of the RTI Act.
However, information on two points were rejected as per Council Resolution
dated 14th March 2014 as every minutes of meetings of the Council of ICSI
contain information including commercial confidence, trade secrets or
intellectual property, the disclosure of which would harm the competitive
position of a third party, and that the information also contains information of
fiduciary relationship. Being aggrieved with the reply of the CPIO, the appellant
preferred a first appeal. The FAA vide order dated 14.09.2020 dismissed the
appeal of the appellant.

Being aggrieved by the decision of the FAA the appellant filed this second
appeal. He further pointed out that as per para 5 and 6 of the second appeal, it
is clear that the appellant has no grievance for not providing any details on
points no. 1,2 and 4 of the RTI application. The only grievance the appellant
has is in respect of points no. 3 and 5 of the RTI application.
He further submitted that the contention of the appellant is that the basis of
denial by the CPIO was not under any sections or under exempted categories
under the 
RTI Act
, but was based on restriction levied by the Council, without
providing any copy of resolution passed thereof.

He also submitted that the legal rationale is the Council Resolution dated
14.03.2014; he further pointed out that this resolution is of utmost importance
as for efficient operation of public authorities and government, preservation of
confidentiality of sensitive information and optimum use of the same is vital.

He also submitted that every minutes of meetings of the Council of Institute of
Company Secretaries of India contain information including commercial
confidence, trade secrets or intellectual property, including but not limited to
students and members information/data, examination details, academic

                                       2

 details, the disclosure of which would harm the competitive position; and that
the information also contains information of fiduciary relationship. Needless to
say, the competent authorities under the 
RTI Act
, in this case ICSI, will have to
maintain a proper balance so that while achieving transparency, the demand
for information does not reach unmanageable proportions affecting other
public interests.

He further submitted that the minutes are bound to contain some confidential
information relating to the financial aspects, or other aspects, as it may be. The
disclosure of such information is likely to harm the interest of the entity.
Furthermore, he submitted that the appellant has failed to show that larger
public interest warrants disclosure of the information sought by the appellant.
He also submitted that the minutes contain issues relating to ICSI's policies,
financial activities, strategies, future plans, and administrative aspects, which if
disclosed to everyone would harm the institute as a whole.
Otherwise also it is a settled law that where an applicant is seeking a large
quantity of data and information and has not indicated any bonafide interest in
seeking such information, the information should invariably outweigh the cost
of providing it and it should not be done.

Nevertheless, he also submitted that the application seeking information as
framed by the appellant seems to seek indiscriminate and impractical demands
for disclosure of all and sundry information. 
In this context, reference may be
made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of 
CBSE and Anr. Vs.
Aditya Bandopadhyay
 and ors. (2011) 8 SCC 497.


He also relied on a similar case i.e Appeal no. CIC/AT/A/2010/001031 in the
matter of Kishanlal Mittal vs CPIO SBI, Mumbai. In the said case, the appellant
filed an RTI application seeking information such as details of minutes of
meeting of board of directors of SBI from April, 2008 onwards. The CPIO has
expressed inability to provide the information on the ground that this was
exempted from disclosure
 u/s 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act. The FAA agreed with the
decision of the CPIO. The Commission upheld the decision of the FAA.
He summed up stating that the appellant's averment is baseless regarding
"important" and "unimportant" or "non-confidential" categories are
concerned, he submitted that in the press release few details were made
public as the same did not contain any sensitive information of ICSI. However,
that does not mean that the other information that were not released in public
are un-important or non-confidential as alleged by the appellant. On the other
hand, it established the fact that information that has not been made public is
sensitive information and exempted from disclosure
 u/s 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act.



                                         3


 Observations:

The Commission could not examine the order in case no.
CIC/AT/A/2010/001031 in the matter of Kishanlal Mittal vs CPIO SBI, Mumbai
as the copy of the same was not enclosed. 
Be that as it may, the respondent
had relied on the decision of the Delhi High Court dated 18.08.2020 in the
matter of 
Goods & Service Tax Network vs Information Commissioner, CIC &
Anr
, W.P (C) NO. 11399/2016, wherein the learned counsel relied on paras 17
and 18, para 17 and 18 which are extracted below:


     "17. In my opinion the minutes of the board meetings are bound to
     contain some confidential information relating to the commercial
     aspects of the company, the technological aspects of the technology and
     other IT network that it is providing to various governments/government
     agencies. It would include information of commercial confidence,
     information which can be termed to be trade secrets, information which
     can be termed to be intellectual property regarding the various IT
     technologies used. Disclosure of such information is likely to harm the
     interest of the petitioner. Respondent has failed to show that larger
     public interest warrants the disclosure of such information. This aspect
     has not been noted or stated in the impugned order.

     18. 
In the above context, reference may also be had to the judgment of
     the Supreme Court in the case of 
Central Board of Secondary Education &
     Anr. vs. Aditya Bandhopadhyay & Ors.
, (2011) 8 SCC 497. In 
the said
     judgment
, the Court held that indiscriminate and impractical demands
     under the 
RTI Act
 for disclosure of all and sundry information unrelated
     to transparency and accountability would be counterproductive as it will
     adversely affect the efficiency of the administration and result in
     executive getting bogged down with non-productive work of collecting
     and furnishing information. The relevant para of 
the said judgment
 reads
     as follows:-


     "67. Indiscriminate and impractical demands or directions under the 
RTI
     Act
 for disclosure of all and sundry information (unrelated to
     transparency and accountability in the functioning of public authorities
     and eradication of corruption) would be counterproductive as it will
     adversely affect the efficiency of the administration and result in the
     executive getting bogged down with the non-productive work of
     collecting and furnishing information. 
The Act
 should not be allowed to
     be misused or abused, to become a tool to obstruct the national
     development and integration, or to destroy the peace, tranquillity and
     harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be converted into a tool of
     oppression or intimidation of honest officials striving to do their duty.
     The nation does not want a scenario where 75% of the staff of public

                                     4

       authorities spends 75% of their time in collecting and furnishing
      information to applicants instead of discharging their regular duties. The
      threat of penalties under the 
RTI Act
 and the pressure of the authorities
      under the 
RTI Act
 should not lead to employees of a public authorities
      prioritising "information furnishing", at the cost of their normal and
      regular duties.

      In my opinion, the above judgment may apply to the facts of this case.
      The application for information as framed seems to seek indiscriminate
      and impractical demands for disclosure of all and sundry information.
      However, a firm conclusion cannot be reached as full details are not on
      record."

The above case was not related to minutes of an educational institution and
also the same was remanded back to CIC for decision. Be that as it may,
information sought was not in the opinion of the Commission indiscriminate
and voluminous.

Based on a perusal of the record, it was noted that the CPIO vide letter dated
12.08.2020 provided a point-wise reply to the appellant. In respect of points
no. 1&2 of the RTI application, the CPIO replied that the information sought is
dynamic in nature and calculated as per the parameters given by the member
at the time of payment of fees. Therefore, the requisite information sought is
not being maintained in the form/content as desired, hence stands exempted

u/s 2(f)
 of the RTI Act. In respect of point no. 4 the CPIO replied that the
queries are in the nature of seeking clarification/opinion and therefore, does
not fall within the definition of information
 u/s 2(f)
 of the RTI Act.
In respect of points no. 3 & 5 the CPIO replied that as per Council Resolution,
Agenda & Minutes of the Committees and the Board of the Council and the
Institute shall not be provided under the 
RTI Act
. The CPIO was given an
opportunity to explain the legality of such resolution which contravenes the
provisions of the 
RTI Act
, to which he could not provide a plausible
explanation.

The FAA vide order dated 14.09.2020 had held that most of the extracts of
minutes of the meetings of the ICSI contain information which are relating to
sensitive matters i.e. students' and members' information/data, examinations,
academics, 
Company Secretaries Act, 1980
, etc. This information included
commercial confidence, trade secrets or intellectual property, the disclosure of
which would harm the competitive position of a third party and the disclosure
of such information is not in larger public interest. Therefore, It is strongly

                                       5

 urged that all this information squarely falls within the ambit of 
Section 8(1)(d)

of the RTI Act and there is such information which is maintained in the
fiduciary relationship; the disclosure of such information is also not in larger
public interest as per the 
Section 8(1)(e)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. However, as
decided by the higher authorities of the ICSI, there are some of the extracts of
the minutes of the meetings the ICSI which have already been uploaded on the
website of the ICSI for which there were no issue to upload for public. The FAA
Office has carefully considered the application, the response, the appeal and
the records made available and finds that the matter can be decided based on
the material available on record. The FAA Office concurred with the submission
of the CPIO. The respondent is directed to provide the relevant link where the
extract of the meetings are uploaded on the website of the Institute to the
appellant within 07 days from the date of issue of the order.
The appellant claimed that the website contains only extracts of important
decisions not extract of minutes. The CPIO contended that on 18.09.2020 the
FAA's order was complied with, however, he also agreed the extracts of
minutes are not available on the website.

The FAA's claim of exemption under Sec 8(1)(d) and (e) appears to be an
afterthought, moreover, the recent written submissions of the CPIO also lacks
reasoning for treating the minutes as confidential and exempted and no
exemption clause was justifiably invoked.

Decision:

As information on points no. 3 and 5 cannot be denied without any exemption
clause being relied upon and also the exemption clause cannot be invoked
without any reasoning, the Commission finds the denial of information not
acceptable and maintainable. The CPIO shall apply Sec 10 of the 
RTI Act
 and
sever the financial details (if any) and provide the copies of the minutes as
sought for in points no. 3 & 5 of the RTI application, to the appellant within 7
days from the date of receipt of the order.

                   The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                             Vanaja N. Sarna (वनजा एन. सरना)
                                      Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )

                                        6

 Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मा णत स या पत ित)


A.K. Assija (ऐ.के. असीजा)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011- 26182594 /
 दनांक / Date





                            7