[Cites 
4
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Deepak Kumar Singh vs Sashastra Seema Bal, on 13 October, 2021


                               केन्द्रीयसूचनाआयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                            बाबागंगनाथमागग, मुननरका
                       Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                        नईनिल्ली, New Delhi - 110067

द्वितीय अपील संख्या / Second Appeal No.
    CIC/SSBAL/A/2019/116020

Shri Deepak Kumar Singh                                       ... अपीलकताा /Appellant
                                   VERSUS/बनाम
                                                           ...प्रद्वतवादीगण /Respondent
CPIO
Sashastra Seema Bal, Darjeeling

Date of Hearing                           :   13.10.2021
Date of Decision                          :   13.10.2021
Chief Information Commissioner            :   Shri Y. K. Sinha

 Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on                  :   03.12.2018
PIO replied on                            :   01.01.2019
First Appeal filed on                     :   20.01.2019
First Appellate Order on                  :   18.02.2019
2ndAppeal/complaint received on           :   05.04.2019

 Information sought
 and background of the case:



 The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 03.12.2018 seeking information
 on the following points:-

    1. During my posting at 41/63 BN SSB (deputation tenure) l conducted
       more than 90 ops(having official record with me) out of which approx.
       40 ops were conducted in depth area which did not fall under
       jurisdiction of SSB. Kindly provide information whether these ops
       were conducted without knowledge of competent authority or any
       written permission was asked and was permission in writing accorded
       in each case.

    2. Whether on every occasions ops were not being conducted on verbal
       approval? Was conducting ops out of jurisdiction restricted? If so how
       42 ops beyond jurisdiction were conducted under my command

    3. On 22.02.2018 during performing duty in national interest and in the
       process of saving life of under command and myself when both were
       forcefully abducted by antinational elements, one of the ANE was
       found dead. Though it was a joint ops with police but due to unknown
       reason they hided the fact and denied the joint ops but more
       surprisingly SSB also denied about conducting ops by 63 BN SSB


                                                                         Page 1 of 3

        troops and also informed in writing to police that 63rdRD BN is reserve
       Bn and not authorized to conduct ops. I want information that if 63rd
       BN SSB was not authorized for ops even joint ops than how I
       conducted 42 ops in depth area, out of jurisdiction of SSB and what
       disciplinary action was taken against undersigned by higher
       headquarters of SSB for conducting ops beyond jurisdiction. Does
       acceptance of conducting ops in depth area not show permission of
       higher headquarters?

    4. Was any disciplinary action initiated against Sh. Manoranjan Pandey
       2ic and other personnel of 63 BN SSB against whom corruption and
       financial irregularities reported by undersigned to IG Frontier
       headquarters SSB Siliguri, after taking over charge of officiating
       commandant of 63 BN SSB in the M/O May 2017.



The CPIO/Deputy Inspector General, SSB vide letter dated 01.01.2019
intimated the Appellant that under 
section 24
 of RTI Act, 2005, SSB is
exempted from the provisions of the said Act except in the case pertaining to
corruption and Human Right Violation. Hence, information on point No. 1 to
3 cannot be provided as no case of corruption and human rights violation is
involved on the part of the Force. Further, information on point 4 being third
party information has been dealt with under 
section 11
 of RTI Act, 2005 and
the third party has sent a written submission not to disclose the information
or record. Hence, information sought cannot be provided.



Dissatisfied with the reply from the CPIO, the Appellant filed a First Appeal
dated 20.01.2019. The FAA/ Inspector General, SSB vide order dated
18.02.2019 upheld the reply of the CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Appellant approached the Commission
with the instant Second Appeal.



Facts emerging in Course of Hearing:



A written submission has been received from the CPIO and DIG, Frontier HQ,
SSB, Siliguri dated nil wherein the replies available on record were reiterated.



In order to ensure social distancing and prevent the spread of the pandemic,
COVID-19, hearing through audio conference was scheduled after giving prior
notice to both the parties.



The Appellant participated in the hearing through audio conference. He stated
that the information sought should be disclosed as it pertained to the
disciplinary proceedings initiated against him on the ground that he
undertook an operation without the approval of the competent authority.



The Respondent represented by Shri Thomas Chacko, DIG, SSB, Darjeeling
participated in the hearing through audio conference. He stated that the
information sought pertained to the joint operations carried out by the public
authority which cannot be disclosed being sensitive and confidential


                                                                       Page 2 of 3

 information pertaining to the security of the state. Furthermore, since their
organisation was exempted
 u/s 24
 of the Act, the information can only be
disclosed if the issues raised by the Appellant pertained to allegations of
corruption or human rights violation which is not the case in the present
instance. Explaining the background of the matter, Shri Chacko also stated
that action was taken against the Appellant following the due process of law.



Decision

Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by both the
parties, the Commission is of the view that an appropriate response has been
provided by the CPIO/ FAA as no allegation of corruption or violation of
human rights has been substantiated by the Appellant. As held by the
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in CBI, New Delhi vs CIC and Anr, WP (C) 11092/
2017 decided on 02.02.2018, it is a settled position of law that service matters
pertaining to disciplinary proceedings initiated against an employee of an
organization exempted from the purview of the 
RTI Act
 as per 
Section 24
 of
the Act cannot be classified as human rights violations. Furthermore, the
Commission also concurs with the stand of the Respondent regarding non-
disclosure of information sought in point no 4 of the RTI application as the
same pertained to a third party employee exempted from disclosure as per

Section 8 (1) (j)
 of the RTI Act. Hence, no further intervention of the
Commission is warranted in the instant Second Appeal which is disposed off
accordingly.



                                                                Y. K. Sinha (वाई. के. नसन्हा)
                                       Chief Information Commissioner (मुख्य सूचना आयुक्त)

Authenticated true copy
(अद्विप्रमाद्वणत सत्याद्वपत प्रद्वत)

S. K. Chitkara (एस. के. द्विटकारा)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26186535





                                                                                   Page 3 of 3