[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Kumar Medhavi vs Reserve Bank Of India on 10 August, 2022


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                              के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                          बाबा गंगनाथ माग,मुिनरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                        नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या/Second Appeal Nos. CIC/RBIND/A/2020/697871 &
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/602222

Mr. Kumar Medhavi                                       ... अपीलकता/Appellants
(Yes Bank Limited)

Mr. Amruta Garg
(Yes Bank Limited)
                                     VERSUS
                                      बनाम
CPIO                                                    ... ितवादी/Respondent
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Supervision, Centre-1
World Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade
Colaba, Mumbai-400005

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:-

 RTI : 18-03-2020              FA    : 14-07-2020            SA       : 28-12-2020
                                                             Hearing : 03.06.2021,
 CPIO : 18-06-2020             FAO : 21-08-2020              08.06.2021 & 04-08-
                                                             2022

                                    ORDER

1.     The instant matter was earlier listed before this Commission on 08.06.2021
vide which the Commission had observed that "The Commission after adverting
to the facts and circumstances of the case, and perusal of records, observes that
the appellant bank has prayed for interim order restraining the CPIO from
releasing the information in terms of prayer i.e. the appellant would suffer
irreparable loss and injury if the information is disclosed. In terms of the prayer,
the second appeal is admitted and keeping in view of the urgency, the operation
of the CPIO's reply dated 18.06.2020 and FAA's order dated 21.08.2020
mentioned in para 1 are stayed till further orders".

2.     The matter is listed today for further hearing.



                                                                          Page 1 of 7


 Hearing:



3.     The appellant bank was represented through his counsel Shri Sanju Kumar
who was personally present in the hearing. The respondent, Shri Vinod Kumar,
DGM attended the hearing through video-conferencing. The original RTI
applicant Shri Ram Biri was not present despite notice.

4.     The written submissions of the respondent are taken on record.

5.     The counsel for the appellant bank submitted that a second appeal of YES
Bank with identical RTI application of the original RTI applicant is listed before
the Commission in file no. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/602222 dated 29.08.2022.
Therefore, both the second appeals may be clubbed together.

6.     The counsel for the appellant bank submitted that the CPIO, RBI and FAA
had violated the principles of natural justice, as they had not given any personal
hearing to the Appellant Bank before passing their decisions in the matter. No
reasons were given for not offering personal hearing in the first appeal. That a
careful appreciation of the grounds of appeal would reveal that the FAA has failed
to appreciate the legal position and other attendant factors while deciding on the
application made by the RTI Applicant. As elucidated in the grounds of appeal,
this is a matter of serious concern for the Bank and any disclosure of the
information would cause serious loss, injury and prejudice to the Bank. Thus, it
is therefore just, fair and necessary that the Order is set aside by this Hon'ble
Commission for the reasons stated in the grounds of appeal. This Hon'ble
Commission may be pleased to set aside the Order and to remand the case for re-
consideration purely on merits after hearing the Bank. That disclosure of
requested information is exempted under 
section 8 (1) (d)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.
The disclosure of such information may affect the business vis-à-vis commercial
confidence of the Bank and will shake the image of the Bank. He further
submitted similar matter in file nos. CIC/RBIND/A/2020/690918 & 694122 has
already been heard and adjudicated by the Commission on 16.06.2022.

7.     The representative of the Reserve Bank of India while presenting their case
inter alia submitted that the applicant, Shri Ram Biri, vide his RTI application
inter alia, sought, list of defaulters of Appellant Bank etc. They further submitted
that the then CPIO issued the notice under 
Section 11(1)
 read with 
Section 11(2)

of the Right to Information Act, 2005 
(RTI Act
) to the third party i.e. appellant
bank informing that RBI was required to disclose the information sought by Shri
Ram Biri, enabling appellant to make written submission within 30 days from the
date of receipt of the notice as to whether the information sought by the applicant
might be disclosed or not along with reasons for the same. After considering the
response from Appellant Bank, the CPIO decided to disclose the list of defaulters


                                                                          Page 2 of 7

 of Appellant Bank etc. to the applicant. He further submitted that the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in RBI vs. Jayantilal N. Mistry & Ors (2016) 3 SCC 525 observed
that :-

        "RBI is clearly not in any fiduciary relationship with any bank. RBI ought
        to act with transparency and not hide information that might embarrass
        individual banks. It is duty bound to comply with the provisions of the 
RTI
        Act
 and disclose the information sought by the applicant."

The FAA also observed that the list of borrowers as reported under CRILC by
banks forms part of the record maintained by the Reserve Bank and the same is
in the possession of the Reserve Bank. Hence the same may be disclosed by RBI.
The FAA concluded that there was no merit in the appeal of the appellant and
accordingly dismissed the bank's appeal. The respondent further contended that
in order to withhold any information sought by the applicant under the 
RTI Act
,
such information should fall within any of the exempted items under 
Section 8

and 
9
 of the RTI Act. The respondent also contended that the list of such
defaulters is reported every quarter along with their names and amount
outstanding. It is an automatic compilation and such information is readily
available with the Reserve Bank of India.



Decision:

8.      The Commission, after hearing the submissions of both the parties and after
perusal of records, observes that the original RTI applicant has sought
information regarding list of defaulters of Appellant Bank as sought on point nos.
2 and 9 of the RTI application. The CPIO, Reserve Bank of India had issued
notices under 
Section 11(1)
 and 
11(3)
 to the appellant bank intending to disclose
the information. Aggrieved by the decision of the CPIO, the appellant bank had
filed first appeal with the First Appellate Authority. The FAA had also dismissed
the first appeal of the appellant bank summarily. The Commission observes that
the RTI applicant had insisted for disclosure of information as per Jayantilal N.
Mistry's case. The Appellant Bank contested that the information sought as a
whole is exempted from disclosure under 
Section 8 (1) (a)
, 
Section 8(1) (d)
,

Section 8(1)(j)
 and 
8(1) (e)
 of the RTI Act and that the CPIO/FAA has not passed
any reasoned order settling their objections nor gave any opportunity of hearing
to them.

9.      The Commission takes note of the submissions made by the Bank that the
information, proposed to be disclosed is in the nature of credit information and
the same was supplied to the Reserve Bank of India in fiduciary capacity as the
Regulator under the provisions of the 
Banking Regulation Act
 as well as the

Credit Information Companies Regulation Act, 2005
 (CICRA). Under the

                                                                         Page 3 of 7

 provisions of CICRA there is a specific bar on the disclosure of such credit
information. Further 
Section 174 (a)
 of the Act, clearly mentions that "no credit
information shall be disclosed to any person other than its specified users." The
large amount of data relating to its clients including their identity, personal details
etc. is shared with the regulator, without any redaction or withholding the
information, in good faith that these will be objectively analysed in discharge of
their statutory obligations to make fair judgment on their functioning without
affecting their competitive position.To this extent, there is an element of trust and
confidence in sharing the data, both financial and operational, between the RBI
and the bank. The information and data of the clients in the hands of Bank also
has the element of trust and confidence that such data will not be disclosed or
shared against their right to privacy/commercial interest.

10. There are apparently two set of such information which have been shared
by the bank with the regulator under statutory obligation. First is the
information/data of clients relating to their business/commercial operations,
financial transactions, business and commercial strategy which is shared by
clients with financial institutions in full trust and confidence and is held by them
in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure under the 
RTI Act
 in their hands.
Second set is the information relating to business strategy, decisions, transactions,
other operational data etc. of financial institution which may have bearing on their
competitive position and also enjoys the exemption from disclosure in their
hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise, under the 
RTI Act
. The Commission
is of the view that the exemption of disclosure of certain information under

Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of financial institutions does not
evaporate once such data/information is shared, in good faith and trust, with the
regulator under statutory obligations. This aspect is not the ratio of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's judgment and decision of the regulator to
consider redacting such data/information while disclosing the reports is to be
aligned with this and other judicial pronouncements of Supreme Court and High
Courts covering such aspects.

11. The Commission further observes that orders simpliciter irrespective of the
different objections raised by the appellant bank apparently lacked application of
mind or reasons on the part of the CPIO. Reasons for rejection or acceptance of
the specific objections raised by them has not been spelt out in the order which
has been passed without giving an opportunity of hearing to them.The
Commission further observes that the CPIO is free to take decisions on disclosure
of information as per provision of 
RTI Act, 2005
 giving a reasoned orders on the
objections filed. The CPIO while issuing notice under 
Section 11
 of the RTI Act
has given the opportunity to the Appellant Bank to file their objections, if any,

                                                                             Page 4 of 7

 against disclosure of information sought but has not found it necessary to give
them an opportunity of hearing. While not doing so, the CPIO has not passed any
reasoned order covering his deliberations on their objections, his understanding
of law or jurisprudence in deciding specific objections, in favor of disclosure etc.
Order passed by the CPIO is cryptic, without any reference to objections raised
by the Appellant Bank. Similarly, the FAA instead of passing a speaking order
have also given a cryptic order to the Appellant Bank. The CPIO and the FAA
are expected to apply their mind and pass reasoned order elaborating reasons for
accepting /not accepting their objections in his decision before issuing the intent
of disclosing the information. Further, no opportunity of personal hearing was
given to the appellant nor speaking order have been passed by FAA for not giving
such opportunity of hearing. The Commission is of the view that every objection
should be dealt and rejected/accepted with a reason and reasons for not giving
opportunity of personal hearing should be well reasoned too in view of wider
implications.

12. The Commission observes that rightful claims of the RTI applicant has to
be adjudicated in the light of specific objections filed by the Appellant Bank,
various judicial pronouncements of Hon'ble Supreme Court and High Courts
providing guidance on such matters. Opportunity of hearing should necessarily
be provided and orders passed by the CPIO and the FAA otherwise should be
reasoned, speaking and clear. In the present case, such order should enumerate
the principles for disclosure or non-disclosure of list of defaulters of Appellant
Bank or various types of data, personal information, commercially sensitive
information of clients or institution, specifically excluded disclosures under
various Acts, etc.

13. In light of the above observations and considering all the facts and
circumstances of the above mentioned cases, the Commission is of the view that
contour of the arguments are identical as held in the Full Bench judgment of this
Hon'ble Commission passed in file no. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460& Ors.
videorder dated 05.05.2022. It has been observed that there are minor variations
in the matters in hand when compared with the matters already decided by the
Commission as above.

14. It has already been stated supra that detailed view in file nos.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 & Ors. dated 05.05.2022 wherein issues of
redaction, ratio of Jayantilal Mistry case and other related issues are discussed in
detail. Perusal of the relevant paragraphs in Jayantilal Mistry judgment make it
clear that the fundamental rights enshrined upon the citizens in form of right to
information are not absolute and that the right to information may not draw
precedence over right to privacy. Therefore, the Courts need to strike a balance

                                                                          Page 5 of 7

 between the rights as well as protections guaranteed to a citizen under 
Article 19

of the Constitution. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held that the disclosure
of information relating to banks may be allowed taking into account the
circumstances and nature of information sought for and not in a blanket manner.
The Commission advised the CPIO to consider taking the relevant references
from the said order while deciding the above mentioned cases.

15. Further, the Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct
of the CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due
care has to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making
reasoned order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and later
in the hands of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be required
to adjudicate such RTI applications in the light of the observations of the
Commission afresh. The Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view
on various objections filed by the Appellant and submissions made by applicant
to reach the decision in favor or against on case to case basis. He has to factor the
observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry case, Commission's
judgment dated 05.05.2022 and other relevant judgments. Hence, with these
observations the order passed by the CPIO and FAA in these matters is set aside
and the case is being remanded to the CPIO for adjudication afresh in line with
the     Commission       full   bench      decision     passed    in     file   nos.

CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 & Ors. dated 05.05.2022. In case, the
appellant/applicant is aggrieved with the order of the CPIO, they are at the liberty
to file first appeal before the First Appellate Authority and afterwards second
appeal before the Commission.

16. With the above observations, both the above appeals are hereby disposed
of.

17. Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.




                                                             नीरज कु मार गु ा)
                                         Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरज           ा
                                                                 सूचना आयु )
                                       Information Commissioner (सू

                                                          दनांक / Date : 04-08-2022
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)


S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),
(011-26105682)

                                                                           Page 6 of 7

 Addresses of the parties:

1.    CPIO
      Reserve Bank of India
      Department of Supervision, Centre-1
      World Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade
      Colaba, Mumbai-400005

2.    Mr. Kumar Medhavi
      Executive Vice President
      Legal Risk Management
      Yes Bank Limited,

3.    Ms. Amruta Garg
      Yes Bank

4.    Shri Ram Biri (Original Applicant)





                                            Page 7 of 7