[Cites 
17
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


T V Sudhakar vs Reserve Bank Of India on 15 September, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                  के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                           Central Information Commission
                               बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                            Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                            नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No: CIC/RBIND/A/2022/149951

T. V. Sudhakar
(Kotak Mahindra Bank)                                     ......अपीलकता/Appellant


                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम


CPIO,                                            ........ तवाद गण/Respondent
The CPIO,
Reserve Bank of India,
Department of Supervision,
World Trade Centre-1, Cuffe
Parade, Colaba, Mumbai-400005,
MH.


Date of Hearing                     :   05/09/2023
Date of Decision                    :   14/09/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :              Saroj Punhani

(Note: The instant appeal has been filed by the third party i.e. Kotak Mahindra
Bank aggrieved by an order passed by the FAA, RBI).

Relevant facts emerging from complain:

RTI application filed on            :   23/04/2022
CPIO replied on                     :   06/06/2022
First appeal filed on               :   04/07/2022
                                          1
  First Appellate Authority order     :   18/08/2022
 2nd Appeal/Complaint dated          :   21/10/2022

Information sought
:

The RTI applicant Abhinav Aggarwal filed an RTI application dated 23.04.2022
seeking following information:



        "Please provide me copies of Inspection Reports of Kotak Mahindra Bank for
last five years. Please also provide file-notings on movement of this RTI Application."



In response, the CPIO vide its letter dated 06.06.2022 issued a notice
 u/s. 11(3)
 of
the RTI Act to the Appellant i.e. Kotak Mahindra Bank.



       "Please refer to our letter No. CO.DOS.DSD.No.VK(392)/01-12-001/2022-
2023 dated May 10, 2022. wherein we had issued a notice under 
section 11(1)
 read
with 
section 11(2)
 of the Right to Information Act. 2005 with respect to captioned
RTI request to enable you to make a written submission as to whether the
information may be disclosed or not along with reasons for exemption from
disclosure under any clause of 
RTI Act, 2005
 ("the Act).



       In response to our notice. Kotak Mahindra Bank ("the bank") vide letter dated
May 19. 2022 has submitted that the information sought is exempt from disclosure
under 
Section 8(1)(a)
, 
8(1)(d)
, 
8(1)(j)
 and 
8(1)(e)
 of the Act Further, the bank has
submitted that the Act doesn't apply to them as the bank is not covered within the
definition of public authorities as defined under 
Section 2 (h)
 of the Act.



 
The objections made by the bank to the disclosure proposed in the notice
dated May 10, 2022, have been examined and duly considered. It is stated° that the
exemption from disclosure under clauses (a). (d) and (e) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the Act is
not applicable in view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court (SC) in 
Reserve
Bank of India v. Jayanthilal N. Mistry & Ors
 . (AIR 2016 SC 1: (2016) 3 SCC 525). As
regards the kind of information contained in AFI/scrutiny reports or related
documents, etc. for which exemption from disclosure was claimed by the Reserve
Bank under clauses (a), (d) and (e) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the Act, the Supreme Court has
specifically held that since such information is provided to the Reserve Bank under
mandate of law, the claim of exemption is not sustainable.
 
The following
observation of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Reserve Bank of India & Ors. v
Jayantilal N. Mistry & Ors..
 (2016) 3 SCC 525 is pertinent in this regard.




                                          2


       "RBI is supposed to uphold public interest and not the interest of individual
      banks RBI is clearly not in any fiduciary relationship with any bank. RBI has
      no legal duty to maximize the benefit of any public sector or private sector
      bank. and thus, there is no relationship of 'trust' between them. RBI has a
      statutory duty to uphold the interest of the public at large. the depositors,
      the country's economy, and the banking sector. Thus. RBI ought to act with
      transparency and not hide information that might embarrass individual
      banks It is duty bound to comply with the provisions of the RT1 Act and
      disclose the information sought by the respondents herein."



4. It is further stated that in 
Girish Mittal v. Parvathy Sundaram and Another
, (2019)
(6) SCALE 804, the apex Court directed the Reserve Bank that "the Respondents are
duty bound to furnish all information relating to inspection reports and other
material apart from the material that was exempted in pars 77 of the judgement"


in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case. In paragraph Ti of the judgement 
referred to above
, the
Supreme Court observed. as follows:




      'When it comes to national economic interest. disclosure of information
      about currency or exchange rates, interest rates, lax, the regulation and
      supervision of banking, insurance, and other financial institutions. proposals
      for expenditure or borrowing and foreign investment could in some cases
      harm the national economy. particularly if released prematurely'. Regarding
      such information affecting national interest. the Supreme Court further
      observed in the same paragraph that ". . the appropriate time of providing
      the information which will depend on the nature of the information sought
      for and the consequences it will lead to after coming in public domain.'


      5. The exemption under 
Section 8(1) (j)
 is available in respect of "personal
information" of an individual. The word "personal information" used in 
Section
8(1)
Q) may not cover the information relating to a body corporate. If the
information includes details of "individuals', the same may be exempted
information under 
Section 8(1)
 0) of the Act.



       6. It is stated that where the information sought is part of the record of a
public authority, and where such information is required to be maintained under
any law or the rules or regulations of the public authority, the Act cast an obligation
upon the public authority, to furnish such information to an applicant subject to the
provisions of the Act. Further, to withhold any information sought by applicants



                                          3

 under the Act, such information should fall within any of the exempted items under

Section 8
 and 
9
 of the Act.



       7. In view of the foregoing, it has been decided to disclose the Risk
Assessment Reports (RAR) for FY 2016-17 and FY 2017-18 and Risk Assessment
Report and Inspection Report for FY 2018-19 of your bank to the applicant [Annex
to Risk Assessment Report (RAR) for FY 2016-17 and Risk Assessment Report for FY
2018-19 are attached after redacting the information exempt from disclosure under

Section 8(1)(j)
 and 
8(1)(h)
 of the Act].



       8. Hence a Notice under 
Section 11(3)
 of the Act is hereby given apprising you
of the decision taken in the matter."



Being dissatisfied, the Appellant bank through its authorized representative filed a
First Appeal dated 04.07.2022. The FAA vide order dated 18.08.2022 upheld the
reply of CPIO and appeal was dismissed accordingly.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Appellant bank approached the Commission
with the instant Second Appeal.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Adv Ayesh Gandhi representative of the Appellant bank present through
Video-Conference.

Respondent: Vinod Kumar, DGM; Lokesh, Legal Officer present through Video-
Conference.

Original RTI applicant: Represented by Subhash Chandra Aggarwal who was
personally present in the hearing.



The written submissions of the Appellant bank, Respondent and third party are
taken on record.



The Counsel for the Appellant Bank referred to the reply provided by CPIO and
order passed by the FAA and submitted that the CPIO, RBI and FAA had violated
the principles of natural justice, as they had not given any personal hearing to the

                                         4

 Appellant Bank before passing their decisions in the matter. No reasons were given
for not offering personal hearing in the first appeal. He further submitted that a
careful appreciation of the grounds of appeal would reveal that the FAA failed to
appreciate the legal position and other attendant factors while deciding on the
application made by the RTI Applicant. As elucidated in the grounds of appeal, this
is a matter of serious concern for the Bank and any disclosure of the Information
would cause serious loss, injury and prejudice to the Bank. He further submitted
that in accordance with the provisions enshrined under 
sec. 8(1) (d)
, information
including of commercial confidence which has the propensity to harm the
competitive position of third party is exempted and as the banking sector is based
on commercial trust and confidence, any disclosure without the consent of the
concerned customer will not only impact the faith of investors in banks but will also
harm the competitive position of the concerned customer. Therefore, the
information sought is exempted from disclosure under Section 8(1)(d), (e), (h) and

(j) of the 
RTI Act
.

The Counsel further requested to decide the above mentioned matter in the light
of the Full Bench judgment of this Hon'ble Commission passed in file no.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 & Ors. vide order dated 05.05.2022 wherein the
Commission has remanded the matters to the CPIO for fresh adjudication by
keeping in mind principles of natural justice.



The respondent submitted that the RTI applicant has specifically sought details of
inspection reports, etc. and the same is part of records maintained by RBI and liable
to be disclosed by RBI in accordance with 
RTI Act
. Further, as per Jayantilal Mistry's
case, complete information can be disclosed to the RTI applicant.



The representative of the original RTI applicant submitted that the information
sought by the RTI applicant should be disclosed by the Respondent public authority
in larger public interest. He stated that compensation should also be awarded to
the original RTI applicant.



Decision:



In the facts of the instant case, it is pertinent to note that a decision of a coordinate
bench of the Commission in the matter of various third-party banks vs. RBI vide File
No. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 covers a detailed
discussion inter alia on the same nature of information sought for from the RBI and
the reliance placed by RBI on the 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case. Suffice to say that the issues

                                           5

 raised in the instant case are encapsulated in that same discussion of the
coordinate bench in the following manner:




 
"39. A comprehensive view has to be taken on the objection filed by the
institutions. These objectives has to be deliberated and adjudicated in the light of

Jayantilal Mistry
's case and other judicial pronouncements relevant in such matter,
some of which have been referred by the Commission in the above parts as well.
The Commission while examining various objections realize that the Writ Petitions
filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is seeking directions of the Supreme
Court for non-disclosure of certain aspects of these audit/inspection report and any
such guidance in these Writ Petitions will have direct bearing and provide further
clarity to the CPIO/FAA in adjudicating various aspects of disclosure/non-disclosure
of reports or the information/data which are part of these reports under the
provisions of the 
RTI Act
.
 The Commission takes note that all the cases/second
appeals filed herein are based on interpretations of RBI Vs. Jayantilal Mistry case
and other relevant judicial pronouncements requesting for full disclosure vis-à-vis
with exemptions under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act for non-disclosure of full or parts
of these reports.

 
40. In view of the above observations, the Commission is of the view that the
reports generated in the hands of regulatory public authority in discharge of its
statutory obligations are information under 
Section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act, as the
regulator and the regulated entities are not governed by fiduciary relationship. The
orders of the Commission to their effect has been upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case and the position is unchanged even today. Various
objections filed by banks/financial institutions, to be examined, analyzed and
adjudicated upon, are related to various data and information submitted to the
Reserve Bank of India by these financial institutions explaining their operations,
commercial decisions, clients data etc. under statutory obligations can be disclosed
as such. There are apparently two set of such information which have been shared
by the institutions with the regulator under statutory obligation. First is the
information/data of clients relating to their business/commercial operations,
financial transactions, business and commercial strategy which is shared by clients
with financial institutions in full trust and confidence and is held by them in fiduciary
capacity, protected from disclosure under the 
RTI Act
 in their hands. Second set is
the information relating to business strategy, decisions, transactions, other
operational data etc. of financial institutions have been bearing on their
competitive position which also enjoys the exemption from disclosure in their hands,
if it is a public authority or otherwise, under the 
RTI Act
. Some of such data, on case
to case basis be sensitive enough for protection of national interest. The

                                           6

 Commission is of the view that the protection of disclosure of information under

Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of financial institutions does not
evaporate once such data/information is shared, in good faith and trust, with the
regulator under statutory obligation.
 
Various observations of Hon'ble Supreme
Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case also does not indicate so and decision of the
regulator to consider redacting such data/information while disclosing the reports
is aligned with this and other judicial pronouncements of Supreme Court and High
Courts.


 
41. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of the
CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care has
to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making reasoned
order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and later in the hands
of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be required to adjudicate
such RTI applications in the light of the observations of the Commission afresh. The
Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various objections filed by
the Banks and Financial Institutions and submissions made by applicant to reach
the decision in favour or against redaction of various parts of the report on case to
case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal
Mistry
 case and other relevant judgments, some of which have been referred in this
order as well. Hence, with these observations the orders passed by the CPIO and
FAA in these matters are set aside and the cases are being remanded to the CPIO
for adjudication afresh. (Emphasis Supplied)


       42. It is amply clear that Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and
others tagged are admitted in Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein guidance and
direction has been sought on non-disclosure of certain type of information which
are essentially the part of the Annual Inspection Report/RAR, etc. These petitions
also seek protection of interim communication between regulator and the
regulated entity in the process of finalization of these reports or otherwise. It is
obvious that decision in these Writ Petitions will provide clarity and guidance to the
Public Authority on redaction/non-disclosure of a set of information inspite of being
part of these reports which are open to disclosure. At this stage, any decision by the
Public Authority will amount to pre-judging the issues pending admitted Writ
Petitions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Various banks, financial institutions,
respondent public authority and the RTI applicant have already impleaded party
and are presenting their arguments before the Apex Court.

       43. Hence, any decision of redaction or disclosure of information, without
waiting for decision in the Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged may cause irrevocable damage against right of privacy and protection of
commercial interest. Hence, the respondent public authority if expedient may wait

                                          7

 for the outcome in Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others tagged
or seek clarification from the Hon'ble Court and accordingly decide these RTI
applications by following process as enumerated in the earlier paras by the
Commission in the interest of principles of natural justice. While disclosing the
information they should be cautious in taking a considerate view balancing right to
privacy, protection of national and commercial interest on one hand vis-à-vis larger
public interest. (Emphasis Supplied)

 
44. It is further observed that similar view has also been taken by the Division
Bench of the Commission in file bearing nos. CIC/VS/A/2013/001488 and
CIC/VS/A/2013/001805 dated 11.05.2017 wherein the Commission observed that
'Having considered the submissions of both the parties, the Commission observes
that since a similar issue is pending adjudication before the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in the matter of Central for 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. &Ors.
, it would be judicious to await the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court. However, on receipt of the final outcome
from the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter, the appellant shall be at liberty to
file second appeal afresh, if he so desires. The instant appeals are disposed of'."




The above decision is therefore applicable to the instant case and no separate line
of adjudication is warranted in the matter. The stipulations contained in File No.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 stands endorsed to the
Respondent CPIO with emphasis on para 41 & 43 supplied as above.



                       The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                     Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                            हािन)
                                           Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स!यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /


                                           8