[Cites 
11
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Binod Kumar Singh vs Central Administrative Tribunal on 17 March, 2020


                               के ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                            बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/CADMT/A/2018/150327

Binod Kumar Singh                                              ....अपीलकता/Appellant
                                       VERSUS
                                        बनाम
CPIO,
Central Administrative Tribunal,
Patna Bench,
D - Block, Niyojan Bhawan,
1st to 4th Floor,
Bailey Road,
Patna - 800001.                                            ... ितवादीगण /Respondent

RTI application filed on           :   19/04/2018
CPIO replied on                    :   22/05/2018
First appeal filed on              :   28/05/2018
First Appellate Authority order    :   25/06/2018
Second Appeal dated                :   09/08/2018
Date of Hearing                    :   16/03/2020
Date of Decision                   :   16/03/2020

            lwpuk vk;qDr               :       fnO; izdk"k flUgk
   INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :              DIVYA PRAKASH SINHA

Information sought
:

The Appellant 4 points sought information pertaining to O.A Nos. 454/2004 and
654/2004 filled before CAT Bench, Patna.



Grounds for the Second Appeal:

The CPIO has not provided the desired information.



                                           1


 Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present on phone.



Respondent: Sudhir Kumar Jha, Private Secretary & CPIO, Central Administrative
Tribunal, Patna Bench, Bailey Road, Patna present through VC.



Appellant stated that he is aggrieved with the reply of the CPIO on para (iv) of the
RTI Application as 
Section 4(1)(d)
 of RTI Act mandates that public authorities
should disclose reasons for administrative or quasi judicial decisions to affected
persons.



CPIO submitted that Appellant is pursuing his dissatisfaction with the order of CAT
in his matter and as a CPIO under 
RTI Act
 he can only provide such information
which is available on record. He further asserted that apart from the said order
there is no record available on the subject with him to show the reasons as
demanded by the Appellant.



Decision

Commission observes from the perusal of facts on record that under the garb of
seeking information, Appellant has sought to interrogate the CPIO regarding the
rationale of the concerned CAT bench in having passed a certain order. In the
process, Appellant has also misconstrued the import of 
Section 4(1)(d)
 of RTI Act
to include within its ambit questions such as the one sought in the instant RTI
Application. For the sake of clarity, the question is reproduced verbatim
hereunder:



"When OA No. 454/2004 was filed for quashing the order of termination of
services from the post of Section Officer (Probation) and to reinstate on the post of
Section Officer then what was the reason to pass order to examine whether the
applicant could have appointed directly to the post of Senior Auditor? Please state
the reason for taking decision deviating from the subject matter contained in the
petition. Under 
Section 4(d)
 of RTI Act, 2005 it is obligatory for the public
authorities to provide reasons to affected persons."



Appellant may note certain judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court and High Courts
on the scope and ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act as under:

                                         2


 
File No : CIC/CADMT/A/2018/150327


Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
CBSE vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors

[CIVIL APPEAL NO.6454 OF 2011] held as under:




        "35. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some misconceptions about
the 
RTI Act
. 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and
existing. This is clear from a combined reading of 
section 3
 and the definitions of
`information' and `right to information' under clauses (f) and (j) of 
section 2
 of the
Act. If a public authority has any information in the form of data or analysed data,
or abstracts, or statistics, an applicant may access such information, subject to the
exemptions in 
section 8
 of the Act. But where the information sought is not a part
of the record of a public authority, and where such information is not required to
be maintained under any law or the rules or regulations of the public authority,
the Act does not cast an obligation upon the public authority, to collect or collate
such non- available information and then furnish it to an applicant. A public
authority is also not required to furnish information which require drawing of
inferences and/or making of assumptions. It is also not required to provide
`advice' or `opinion' to an applicant, nor required to obtain and furnish any
`opinion' or `advice' to an applicant. 
The reference to `opinion' or `advice' in the
definition of `information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers to such material
available in the records of the public authority. Many public authorities have, as
a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and opinion to the citizens. But
that is purely voluntary and should not be confused with any obligation under
the 
RTI Act
." (Emphasis Supplied)

Similarly, in the matter of 
Khanapuram Gandaiah vs Administrative Officer & Ors

[SLP (CIVIL) NO.34868 OF 2009], Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:




      "6. 
Under the RTI Act
 "information" is defined under 
Section 2(f)
 which
provides:



       "information" means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, report, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force."



      This definition shows that an applicant under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act can
get any information which is already in existence and accessible to the public

                                          3

 authority under law. Of course, under the 
RTI Act
 an applicant is entitled to get
copy of the opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he cannot ask for any
information as to why such opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc. have been
passed...."



      "7....Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material which is
not before him; or any information he could have obtained under law.
Under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such information
which can be accessed by the "public authority" under any other law for the time
being in force. The answers sought by the petitioner in the application could not
have been with the public authority nor could he have had access to this
information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged to give any reasons as to
why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was before him...."

(Emphasis Supplied)

And, in the matter of 
Dr. Celsa Pinto, Ex-Officio Joint Secretary,(School
Education) vs. The Goa State Information Commission
 [2008 (110) Bom L R
1238], the Hon'ble Bombay High Court held as under:




      "..... In the first place, the Commission ought to have noticed that the Act
confers on the citizen the right to information. Information has been defined
by 
Section 2(f)
 as follows.



 
Section 2(f)
 -Information means any material in any form, including records,
documents,memos e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts,reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;



       The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the question why
which would be the same thing as asking the reason for a justification for a
particular thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot expect to communicate
to the citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not done in the sense of
a justification because the citizen makes a requisition about information.
Justifications are matter within the domain of adjudicating authorities and
cannot properly be classified as information." (Emphasis Supplied)

In view of the foregoing, Commission upholds the submission of the CPIO and
finds the Appeal to be bereft of any merit.



                                         4


                                           File No : CIC/CADMT/A/2018/150327

                     The appeal is dismissed accordingly.



                                       Divya Prakash Sinha ( द    काश िस हा )
                                     Information Commissioner ( सूचना आयु )

Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत        त)


Haro Prasad Sen
Dy. Registrar
011-26106140 / 
[email protected]

हरो साद सेन, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक / Date





                                      5