[Cites 
17
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Bharti Lokhande vs Chief Commissioner Of Income Tax (Cca) , ... on 15 December, 2022


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/CCITN/A/2021/645525

Bharti Lokhande                                            ......अपीलकता /Appellant

                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम
CPIO,
O/o the Income Tax officer,
Ward-1(4), Nagpur, RTI Act,
5th Floor, Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar
Bhawan, MECL Building, Seminary Hills,
Nagpur- 440006, Maharashtra.                            .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                     :   13/10/2022
Date of Decision                    :   14/12/2022

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :              Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on            :   12/07/2021
CPIO replied on                     :   30/07/2021
First appeal filed on               :   12/08/2021
First Appellate Authority's order   :   16/09/2021
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated          :   28/09/2021

Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 12.07.2021 seeking for information as
under:

      "Sir, myself Bharti Raipure Lokhande daughter of late Shri Nandram
Raipure, request you to provide me last 5 years ITR returns of my father. My father
expired on 11/10/2020. being the legal heir i request you to submit last 5 years ITR
of my father. I have attached few documents. Pls do the needful asap"

The CPIO replied to the appellant on 30.07.2021 stating as under:



                                          1


        "2. The applicant Smt. Bharti Lokhande has claimed that she is the legal heir
of her father, Late Shri Nandram Raghunath Raipure. However, the applicant has
not provided any documentary evidence like Succession Certificate/ Order of court
etc. establishing her as the legal heir of Late Shri Nandram Raghunath Raipure.

       3. On verification of the ITD System it is seen that the last filed return of
income of Late Shri Nandram Raghunath Raipure is for A.Y. 2020-21 and the same
has been filed by Smt. Lalita Nandram Raipire in the capacity of legal heir of Late
Shri Nandram Raghunath Raipure.

       4. Accordingly, a letter dated 19-07-2021 was issued to Smt. Lalita Nandram
Raipire - the legal heir of Late Shri Nandram Raghunath Raipure as per Income Tax
records. In view of the provision of 
Sec. 8(1)(e)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, she was
requested to give her consent to provide copies of ITRs of Late Shri Nandram
Raghunath Raipure to the applicant Smt. Bharti Lokhande. In response to this
office letter dated 19-07-2021, Smt. Lalita Nandram Raipure furnished a written
reply on 27-07-2021 stating her objection to disclose the information to anyone.

       5. In view of the fact that the information sought by the applicant is third
party information, and Smt. Lalita Nandram Raipure, successor of Late Shri
Nandram Raghunath Raipure under the Will and legal heir as per Income Tax
records, has raised an objection to disclose the information to any one, and since
no larger public interest is observed in the application of the applicant, the
application is hereby rejected."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 12.08.2021 on the
following grounds:



       "As you have mentioned that my mother Mrs Lalita Raipure has filed the ITR
of my late father after his death pls tell me how can i be denied the ITR of my
father and on what basis I am entitled to receive ITR of my father being his legal
heir Income tax department did not seek and did not demand any court order or
succession certificate from my mother when she filed the ITR of my late father in
the capacity of legal heir of my late father Shri Nandram Raipure
       Pls provide me what proof Mrs Lalita Raipure has submitted to prove that
she is the legal heir and she is allowed to file ITR on his behalf
       You are kindly requested to provide me ITR returns of 5 years along with P &
L Balance sheet of my father late Shri Nandram Raipure
       I have already submitted my ID proofs which proofs that I am his legal heir.
Kindly do the needful at the earliest thank you.."

FAA's order dated 16.09.2021 upheld the reply of the CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal.



                                         2


 Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present through video conference.

Respondent: Gajanan S Warhekar, ITO & CPIO present through video conference.
Third party: Represented by Lokesh Raipure though video conference.



The Appellant reiterated the contents of the RTI Application, CPIO's reply and the
grounds of First Appeal and stated that the CPIO has not explained as what proof
do they have that Lalita Raipure is the legal heir and how would she be deemed as
a third party despite being the daughter of the averred late Shri Nandram
Raipure. She further alleged that two FIRs have been already filed against Lokesh
Raipure (Son of late Shri Nandram Raipure) for forging her father's signature in
bank records. She lastly urged the Commission to peruse the copy of her passport
which shows that she is the daughter of late Shri Nandram Raipure as well as
Lalita Raipure and this she believes is enough proof to establish her right to
information in the instant matter.



The CPIO submitted that the information sought for by the Appellant pertained to
a third party and could not have been disclosed to her as she is not the legal
representative of the assessee late Shri Nandram Raipure. He further explained
that as per the Income Tax records, they are not required to go into any dispute
of succession etc. as they are only concerned with the legal representative i.e one
who has been filing the income tax returns and in the instant case, the last return
was filed on the PAN of Nandaram Raipure by Lalita Raipure being the legal heir.
He further sought to reiterate his written submissions as under:



       "a) An RTI application filed by the petitioner received in this office on
13.07.2021. The Appellant had requested to provide copies of I T returns of Late
Shri Nandram Raipure for the last 5 assessment years.

       b) Last return was filed on the PAN of Nandaram Raipure by Lalita Raipure
being legal heir. Since the matter relates to third-party information, consent of
Smt Lalita Raipure (third party) was sought for disclosure by the then CPIO as per

Section 11(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. In response, the third party, Smt Lalita Raipure,
submitted as under:

       "Late Nandaram Raipure has made will and in view thereof the RTI
applicant is a stranger and hence she is not entitled to seek information which is
confidential in nature. The undersigned being his successor under will, have strong
objection to disclosure of information to anyone. Please ensure that no such
disclosure is made to anyone"



                                         3


        Therefore, in view of the above objections and absence of larger public
interest, the request for information sought by the Appellant was rejected by the
CPIO. Further, information sought by the petitioner is held by this office in
fiduciary capacity.

       c) After rejection of the request for information sought, the Appellant filed
first appeal before the FAA & Joint Commissioner of Income Tax, Range -1,
Nagpur. d) The First Appellate Authority did not find any reason to interfere with
the order of the CPIO and upheld the order of the CPIO. Thus appellant/applicant
is before your honour.



      2. Legal position of the RTI matter is as under:



      Section 159 of the Income tax Act, 1961 empowers assessee as well as
Income tax Department to proceeds further on matter of taxability of deceased
person in manner if he had alive. Our Department on the basis of document
available with the legal heir and tax payment if any allows legal heir to
represent on behalf deceased person. Once legal heir filed the return of income
being representative of the assessee, he/she get authority regarding that ITR if
otherwise contradictory not proved. Thus other persons are not entitled to
receive information of deceased person.



     Reliance is placed on the following case laws.

 
a) The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010
&Ors. dated 13-11-2019 titled as CPIO, Supreme Court of 
India v. Subhash
Chandra Agarwal
 was observed:




 
xxx

       nature of an obligation which a citizen owes to the State viz. to pay his
taxes, this information cannot be disclosed to the appellant in the absence of any
larger public interest relying on the legal principle enunciated in the judgment
dated 11-06-2015 rendered by the Hon'ble Bombay High Court in Writ Petition No.
8753 of 2013 titled as 
Shailesh Gandhi v. The Central Information Commission
,
wherein, it has been observed as follows:-




      "16... The Petitioner possibly being aware of the said position has therefore
sought to contend that filing of the Income Tax Returns is a public activity. I am
afraid the said contention is thoroughly misconceived as filing of Income Tax
Returns can be no stretch of imagination be said to be a public activity, but is an
obligation which a citizen owes to the State viz. to pay his taxes and since the said
information is held by the Income Tax Department in a fiduciary capacity, the


                                          4

 same cannot be directed to be revealed unless the pre-requisites for the same are
satisfied"



     ii) Hon'ble Information Commissioners have taken similar view in such
matters of Income tax return vis-a-vis legal heirs in the following cases.



 
a) Matter is similar to 
Kamal Aggarwal vs Income
 tax officer in second
appeal     Nos.       CIC/CCITC/A/2018/155973      CIC/CCITC/A/2018/155918,
CIC/CCITC/AJ2018/155917,              CIC/CCITC/Al2018/155916              &
CIC/CCITC/A/2018/155914 wherein Hon'ble Commissioner has held as under:




      '11. In light of the aforesaid decisions and the legal principles enunciated
      therein, this Commission after considering the factual matrix of the case is
      of the opinion that in the absence of any larger public interest in the matter,
      the appellant is not entitled to seek the ITR details of Late Sh. Madan Lal
      which is exempted u/
Section 8(1)(J)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. Hence, no further
      intervention of the Commission is required in the matter.



      12. With the above observations, these appeals are disposed of'


 
b) Again in similar 
Matter of Ashish Bansal Vs Income
 tax officer in second
appeal Nos. CIC/CCIMAl2020/666457 Hon'ble Commissioner has held as under:




      "11. In view of the above ratios, the Commission is of the opinion that the
      CPIO has rightly denied the information sought under 
Section 8(1)(e)
 &
      
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act and same is being upheld by the Commission.
      Hence, no further intervention of the Commission is required in the matter.



      12. With the above observations, the appeal is disposed of'

      xxx"



Decision:



The Commission at the outset takes on record the objections filed by the third
party in writing as under:



       "With reference to the appeal on the above said matter, Respondent would
like to submit that the Applicant Smt. Bharti Lokhande has called for certain
information vide RTI application regarding copies of ITR for last 5 years/details of
documents submitted by Respondent before the Income Tax Department, in


                                         5

 respect of Respondent legal heir status, for Respondent husband Late Shri
Nandram Raipure.



        In response to the same, it is humbly submitted that after the death of
Respondent's husband, Respondent have registered herself before 
CPC
 Income Tax
as Representative Assesse in the status of legal heir of Respondent's husband by
submitting the documents as per the parameters set by 
the CPC
 Income Tax online
portal. The said documents were duly verified by 
CPC
 Income Tax Department and
thereafter the same were approved and 
CPC
 Income Tax had allowed Respondent
to file return on behalf of her husband.



       It is further submitted that the communication between Respondent and
the Income Tax Department or documents submitted by Respondent before
Income Tax Department or 
CPC
 are not public documents and should not be made
public in any case.



      Further Respondent would like to submit that Respondent had already
raised objection for providing any copy of ITR of Respondent's husband Late Shri
Nandram Raipure to Smt. Bharti Yogesh Lokhande vide letter dated 07109/2021 &
08/09/2021. The hearing on the matter was concluded by the First Appellate
Authority, Joint Commissioner of Income Tax Range- (1).Copy of WILL and Bank
nomination executed by deceased Shri Nandram Raipure in favour of Respondent
was submitted before the authority for verification.



      Respondent would also like to submit that, Respondent had undertaken full
ownership & responsibility to discharge all the liability of Respondent's husband as
fax as Income Tax is concern, hence Respondent had filled the ITR in
representative capacity, whereas Appellant Smt. Bharti Lokhande had never
accepted any responsibility for discharging Income Tax liability hence Appellant do
not have any right to ask for copies of ITR of Late Shri Nandram Raipure.



       Appellant Smt Bharti Lokhande is misusing the 
RTI Act
 to get information of
third party and use the same to harass and blackmail Respondent. Appellant had
also given life threats to Respondent for not sharing the documents as required by
her. The information asked for by the Appellant is undoubtedly of personal nature
and there is no instance wherein public at large is affected by such information.
Appellant had also not presented any instance wherein larger public interest is
involved.



     More ever, as per 
section 8 (1) (e)
 of RTI Act, all the information and
document held by Income Tax Department of any Individual assessee is under the


                                         6

 Fiduciary capacity. It is well settled law and there are numerous case laws by the
Apex Court, wherein it is held that any information or documents of Individual held
in Fiduciary Capacity is of personal nature and should not be shared unless public
at large or nation interest is affected.



      The said information asked for by the Appellant clearly falls under the
person nature and no larger public interest is involved in the matter.



        Respondent would like to bring to the notice of Authority that Appellant had
never challenged the WILL of deceased, on the basis of which the Respondent has
filled the ITR of deceased in representative capacity.



       In view of the above, Respondent once again object for providing any copy
of ITR or any documents of Respondent's husband to Appellant.



      Respondent also prey to hon'ble Authority to impose the cost of
Rs.5,00,000.00 on the Appellant and deposit the same in Prime Minister Relief
Fund, for misusing the 
RTI Act
 and wasting the National resources."



Having considered all the facts on record, the Commission at the outset observes
that income tax returns of a third party fall under the category of 'personal
information' and duly stands exempted from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of
the RTI Act. 
In this regard, the attention of the Appellant is drawn towards a
judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of Central Public
Information Officer, Supreme Court of 
India Vs. Subhash Chandra Agarwal
 in
Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 with Civil Appeal No. 10045 of 2010 and Civil
Appeal No. 2683 of 2010 wherein the import of "personal information" envisaged
under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act has been exemplified in the context of earlier
ratios 
laid down by
 the same Court in the matter(
s) of Canara Bank Vs. C.S.
Shyam
 in Civil Appeal No.22 of 2009; 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande vs. Central
Information Commissioner & Ors.
, (2013) 1 SCC 212 and R.K. Jain vs. Union of
India & Anr., (2013) 14 SCC 794. The following was thus held:




      "59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion, would
indicate that personal records, including name, address, physical, mental and
psychological status, marks obtained, grades and answer sheets, are all treated as
personal information. Similarly, professional records, including qualification,
performance, evaluation reports, ACRs, disciplinary proceedings, etc. are all
personal information. Medical records, treatment, choice of medicine, list of

                                         7

 hospitals and doctors visited, findings recorded, including that of the family
members, information relating to assets, liabilities, income tax returns, details of
investments, lending and borrowing, etc. are personal information. Such
personal information is entitled to protection from unwarranted invasion of
privacy and conditional access is available when stipulation of larger public
interest is satisfied. This list is indicative and not exhaustive..." Emphasis Supplied

Now, it is clear beyond reasonable doubt that there is a family dispute involved in
the matter and the Appellant shall appreciate that adjudication on family
disputes/succession rights etc. is outside the scope of jurisdiction of the
Commission under the 
RTI Act
. Access to information under the 
RTI Act
 is strictly
based on the availability of the records and in the instant matter, the CPIO & FAA
have adequately justified the denial of the information as envisaged under

Section 19(5)
 of the RTI Act based on the information of the legal representative
of the averred deceased third party as available in their records.



The Appellant has conjectured about the basis on which Lalita Raipure has been
recorded as the Legal Representative and has requested the Commission to
determine her right to information in the matter based on a copy of her passport,
both of which is an absolutely untenable argument from the standpoint of the 
RTI
Act
. If the Appellant has a grievance against the records showing Lalita Raipure as
the legal representative of Late Shri Nandram Raipure, she ought to approach the
appropriate forum.

Here, reference may also be had of a judgment of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi
in the matter of 
Hansi Rawat and Anr. v. Punjab National Bank and Ors. (LPA
No.785/2012
) dated 11.01.2013 wherein it has been held as under:




 
"6. ....proceedings under the 
RTI Act
 cannot be converted into
     proceedings for adjudication of disputes as to the correctness of the
     information furnished."(Emphasis Supplied)

The aforesaid rationale finds resonance in another judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi
High Court in the matter of 
Govt. of NCT of Delhi vs. Rajender Prasad (W.P.[C
]
10676/2016) dated 30.11.2017 wherein it was held as under:




      "6. The CIC has been constituted under 
Section 12
 of the Act and the powers
      of CIC are delineated under the Act. The CIC being a statutory body has to
      act strictly within the confines of the Act and is neither required to nor has
      the jurisdiction to examine any other controversy or disputes."



                                         8


 
While, the Apex Court in the matter of 
Union of India vs Namit Sharma (Review
Petition [C] No.2309
 of 2012) dated 03.09.2013 observed as under:




     "20. ...While deciding whether a citizen should or should not get a particular
     information "which is held by or under the control of any public authority",
     the Information Commission does not decide a dispute between two or
     more parties concerning their legal rights other than their right to get
     information in possession of a public authority...." (Emphasis Supplied)

Having observed as above, the Commission does not find any scope of
intervention in the matter.



                    The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                 Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                        हािन)
                                       Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                       9