[Cites 
25
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


S Dinesh vs Reserve Bank Of India on 29 September, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                            बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                         नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/RBIND/A/2022/153147 +
          CIC/RBIND/A/2022/133995

S DINESH
(State Bank of India)                                  ......अपीलकता /Appellant


                                    VERSUS
                                     बनाम
1. CPIO,
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA,
NODAL CPIO, RTI CELL,
DEPARTMENT OF SUPERVISION,
CENTRE-1, WORLD TRADE CENTRE,
CUFFE PARADE, COLABA,
MUMBAI-400005.

2. CPIO,
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA,
ENFORCEMENT DEPARTMENT,
CENTRAL OFFICE, MEZZANINE FLOOR,
MAIN BUILDING, SHAHID BHAGAT SINGH MARG,
FORT, MUMBAI-400005                                 .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                 :   21/09/2023
Date of Decision                :   21/09/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :          Saroj Punhani

Note - The above-mentioned Appeals have been clubbed together for decision
as these are based on similar RTI Applications.
                                      1
 (Note: The instant appeal has been filed by the third party i.e. State Bank of
India aggrieved by an order passed by the FAA, RBI).


Relevant facts emerging from appeal (s):

RTI application filed on           :   01/05/2021, 16/01/2022
CPIO replied on                    :   26/07/2022, 23/03/2022
First appeal filed on              :   11/08/2022, 25/04/2022
First Appellate Authority order    :   11/10/2022, 06/06/2022
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated         :   31/10/2022, 11/07/2022

Information sought
:



                           CIC/RBIND/A/2022/153147

The RTI applicant Shri Girish Mittal filed an RTI application dated 01.05.2021
seeking the following information:



"Kindly provide following information:



Inspection Reports/Risk Assessment Report made by RBI post completing the
inspection of commercial banks and NBFCs for last 3 years available. If RBI has
provided any of the below information earlier, the same may be indicated in the
response quoting the date/ RTI number under which the same was provided:



      (i) HDFC Bank.

      (ii) RBL Bank.

      (iii) Yes Bank.

      (iv) Axis Bank.

      (v) ICICI Bank.

      (vi) Bajaj Finance.

      (vii) State Bank of India.

      (viii) Bank of Baroda.

      (ix) Indus Ind Bank.

      (x) Kotak Mahindra Bank.

      (xi) HDFC Ltd.

      (xii) ILFS

      (xiii) IDFC Bank


                                         2


       (xiv)Sahara Bank Financial Services or any entity of Sahara group registered
      with RBI.



Kindly also provide copies of show cause notices issued to any of the above and
response of these banks/NBFCs."



The CPIO vide its letter dated 26.07.2022 had sent a notice
 u/s. 11
 of the RTI Act
to the Appellant bank i.e. State Bank of India stating as under:



      "Please refer to our letter No. DOS CO RIA No.S1919/01-12-001/2022-2023
dated June 16, 2022, wherein we had issued a notice under 
section 11(1)
 read with

section 11(2)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005 with respect to captioned RTI
request to enable you to make a written submission as to whether the information
may be disclosed or not along with reasons for exemption from disclosure under
any clause of 
RTI Act, 2005
 ("the Act").



       2. In response to our notice, State Bank of India ("the bank") vide letter
dated June 22, 2022, has submitted that the information sought is exempt from
disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(a)
. 8(1)(d), 8(1)(e) and 8(1)(j) of the Act. The bank
also submitted that the information sought to be disclosed by the RBI under the
Act is statutorily confidential under various provisions such as Section 44 of the SBI
Act, 1955, Section 45E and 
Section 45NB
 of RBI Act, 
Section 34A
 of Banking &
Regulation Act, and 
Section 20
 of the Credit Information Companies (Regulation)
Act, 2005.



       3. The objections made by the bank to the disclosure proposed in the notice
dated June 16, 2022, have been examined and duly considered. It is stated that
the exemption from disclosure under clauses (a), (d) and (e) of Section 8(1) of the
Act is not applicable in view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court (SC) in
Reserve Bank of India v. Jayantilal N. Mistry & Ors. (AIR 2016 SC 1 (2016) 3 SCC

525). As regards the kind of information contained in AFI/scrutiny reports or
related documents, etc. for which exemption from disclosure was claimed by the
Reserve Bank under clauses (a), (d) and (e) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the Act, the Supreme
Court has specifically held that since such information is provided to the Reserve
Bank under mandate of law, the claim of exemption is not sustainable. The


                                          3

 following observation of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Reserve Bank of India &
Ors. v. Jayantilal N. Mistry & Ors.
, (2016) 3 SCC 525 is pertinent in this regard:




      "RBI is supposed to uphold public interest and not the interest of individual
      banks. RBI is clearly not in any fiduciary relationship with any bank. RBI has
      no legal duty to maximize the benefit of any public sector or private sector
      bank, and thus there is no relationship of trust' between them. RBI has a
      statutory duty to uphold the interest of the public at large, the depositors,
      the country's economy, and the banking sector. Thus, RBI ought to act with
      transparency and not hide information that might embarrass individual
      banks. It is duty bound to comply with the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and
      disclose the information sought by the respondents herein".



 
4. It is further stated that in 
Girish Mittal v. Parvathy Sundaram and
Another
, (2019) (6) SCALE 804, the apex Court directed the Reserve Bank that "the
Respondents are duty bound to fumish all information relating to inspection
reports and other material apart from the material that was exempted in para 77
of the judgement in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case. In paragraph 77 of the judgement

referred to above
, the Supreme Court observed, as follows:




      "When it comes to national economic interest, disclosure of information
      about currency or exchange rates, interest rates, tax, the regulation and
      supervision of banking, insurance and other financial institutions, proposals
      for expenditure or borrowing and foreign investment could in some cases
      harm the national economy, particularly if released prematurely. With
      regard to such information affecting national interest, the Supreme Court
      further observed in the same paragraph that ...the appropriate time of
      providing the information which will depend on the nature of the
      information sought for and the consequences it will lead to after coming in
      public domain."



       5. The exemption under 
Section 8(1) (i)
 is available in respect of "personal
information" of an individual. The word "personal information" used in 
Section
8(1)(j)
 may not cover the information relating to a body corporate. If the
information includes details of "individuals", the same may be an exempted
information under 
Section 8(1) (j)
 of the Act.



      6. It may be noted that there is no stay order as on date on disclosure of the
requested information.

                                         4


 
7. RBI had, raised contention in 
Reserve Bank of India & Ors. V. Jayantilal N.
Mistry & Ors.
, [(2016) 3 SCC 525] that "the 
Right to Information Act, 2005
 is a
general provision which cannot override specific provisions relating to
confidentiality in earlier legislation in accordance with the principle that where
there are general words, in a later statute it cannot be held that the earlier
statutes are repealed altered or discarded".
 
It is clarified that the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the aforesaid 
Jayantilal/ N. Mistry
's Case had rejected this and other
contentions taken by the Reserve Bank against disclosure of inspection reports of
regulated entities.




       8. In view of the foregoing, it has been decided to disclose the Risk
Assessment Reports (RAR) for the years 2017-18 & 2018-19 and Inspection Report
for the year 2018-19 of your bank to the applicant [copy of the Risk Assessment
Report for the year 2018-19 is attached after redacting the information exempt
from disclosure under 
section 8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.].



      9. Hence a Notice under 
Section 11(3)
 of the Act is hereby given apprising
you of the decision taken in the matter."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant bank through its authorized representative filed a
First Appeal dated 11.08.2022. FAA's order, dated 11.10.2022, upheld the reply of
the CPIO.



                           CIC/RBIND/A/2022/133995

The RTI applicant Priyam Mittal filed an RTI application dated 16.01.2022 seeking
the following information:



"Kindly provide following information:



Inspection Reports/Risk Assessment Report made by RBI post completing the
inspection of commercial banks and NBFCs for last 3 years available under 
BR Act

or any other applicable act.



      (i) HDFC Bank.

      (ii) RBL Bank.

      (iii) Yes Bank.

      (iv) Axis Bank.

                                         5


       (v) ICICI Bank.

      (vi) Bajaj Finance.

      (vii) State Bank of India.

      (viii) Bank of Baroda.

      (ix) IndusInd Bank.

      (x) Kotak Mahindra Bank.

      (xi) HDFC Ltd.

      (xii) ILFS

      (xiii) IDFC Bank

      (xiv) HDB Financial Services Ltd

      (xv) Kotak Mahindra Prime Ltd
      (xvi) Kotak Mahindra Capital Ltd
      (xvii) Kotak Mahindra Investments Ltd

      (xiv) Sahara India Financial Services or any entity of Sahara group registered
      with RBI.



Kindly also provide copies of show cause notices issued to any of the above and
response of these banks/NBFCs."



The CPIO vide its letter dated 23.03.2022 had sent a notice
 u/s. 11
 of the RTI Act
to the Appellant bank i.e. State Bank of India stating as under:



       "Please refer to the 
section 11(1)
 notice Issued by Reserve Bank of India
(RBI) to State Bank of India (the bank) under 
Right to Information Act, 2005
 
(RTI
Act
) vide letter EFD.CO.RTI No. 8638/07.03.001/2021-2022 dated February 22,
2022 and your bank's response vide letter dated March 4, 2022 to the said notice.



       2. The bank has objected to the disclosure of the copy of documents that
include Show Cause Notice issued and responses by the bank (as detailed in
paragraph 2 of the notice dated February 22, 2022). It is said that as SBI being
Domestic Systemically Important Bank (D-SIB), the disclosure will prejudicially
affect the economic interests of State (India) thereby harming the overall public
sentiment and hence the information is exempted from disclosure under 
section
8(1)(a)
. Further, objections are being raised indicating that the information is
exempt under each of the 
Sections 8(1)(d)
 and (e). The bank also referred to

Section 8(1)
) which exempts the information related to personal Information the
disclosure of which has no relationship to any public activity or interest or which


                                         6

 would cause unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual, and the term
'individual' should be interpreted in a broad meaning to include body corporates
like SBI. The supply of information would cause unwarranted invasion of the
privacy of the bank, the same should hence be exempted under 
section 8(1)
0). The
bank has informed that a Writ Petition (1469/2019) was filed by the bank on
9/12/2019 in the Supreme Court of India in the matter.



 
3. The objections made by the bank to the disclosures proposed in the notice
dated February 22, 2022 have been examined and duly considered. With respect
to the Writ Patton filed by the bank, the bank has not produced any stay order for
non-disclosure of information pertaining to the bank. The Honourable Supreme
Court in its Order dated December 16, 2015 in TP No. 91 of 2015 (
Reserve Bank of
India v. Jayantilal N. Mistry
), restricted the scope of the exemption under 
section
8(1)(a)
 to be very limited and may not be relied upon as a matter of course.
Similarly, it refused to accept that there is fiduciary relationship between RBI and
the banks while it is acting as a supervisor/regulator in furtherance to statutory
provisions.




       4. RBI being a public authority is under a legal obligation to disclose the
information held by it about the bank, subject only to the exemptions contained in
that Act. Even otherwise, as indicated in RBI's notice under 
section 11(1)
 of the RTI
Act, information, if any, falling within the scope of the exemptions under 
section
8(1)(d)
, (e) and () is not being disclosed. In this regard the bank has not pointed
out any specific/additional information or part thereof which is exempt from
disclosure under 
RTI Act
. As regards the contention that the information which
was made public by RBI by way of the RBI Press release, explicitly made RBI's
intention clear and the RTI Applicant made no ground to overturn the said
intention, is not tenable.



       5. In light of the above, it has been decided to disclose to the applicant a
copy of the documents as given in the table below, after severing the information
exempt from disclosure in accordance with the provisions of 
section 10 (1)
 of RTI
Act, as indicated in the 
Section 11(1)
 notice issued earlier.



       Accordingly, the notice of the decision taken in the matter is hereby being
given as required
 u/s 11(3)
 of the RTI Act. The copies of the aforesaid documents
after duly severing the information exempt from disclosure are enclosed."



                                         7


 Being dissatisfied, the appellant bank through its authorized representative filed a
First Appeal dated 25.04.2022. FAA's order, dated 06.06.2022, upheld the reply of
the CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant bank approached the
Commission with the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Sonal Purohit, DGM and Abhinav Rishi, Manager (Law) present in
person.

Respondent: Abhishek Joshi, AGM and Suman Choudhary, Legal Officer present
through Video-Conference.

Original RTI applicant not present.



The Appellant bank and the Respondent submitted their written submissions and
the same are taken on record.



The Appellant bank during the hearing reiterated the contents of their instant
second appeal and submitted as under:



"A. In October 2010, several applicants sought copies of RAR's of various banks
including that of the Appellant bank under the Act. The RAR's sought by the
concerned RTI applicants are prepared by RBI pursuant to inspection/scrutiny
conducted by its officers, under 
Section 35
 of the Banking Regulation Act 1949,
annually. The said annual inspection reports, also called RARS, contain
comprehensive review of the performance operational frailties/ functioning of the
banks by RBI in exercise of its supervisory and regulatory powers. The RAR's
contain wide-ranging information, including business plans of the banks to
customer details and legal compliance, it also contains requirement, if any, of
regulatory intervention and risk assessment of various credit risks of the bank in
question, by RB). Such inspection reports are not only irrelevant to the public at
large, but also the information contained thereto are price sensitive and
confidential. As a result, the information requests under the Act were denied by
RBI on the grounds of economic interest. commercial confidence, fiduciary
relationship, and public interest (under applicable exemptions provisions of the
Act). Several applicants filed appeals before the Chief Information Commission
inter alia challenging the denial of the disclosure of the RARS by RBI. B. Findings of
the Apex Court: The issue was finally decided by the Hon'ble Apex court on

                                          8

 16.12.2015 in a Transfer Petition (91/2015) titled as 
Reserve Bank of India vs.
Jayantilal N Mistry
 case, (2016) 3 SCC 525 (Mistry Case/Judgment"). The findings
of the learned Court were broadly made on two aspects of the Act and have been
recorded as under- • Fiduciary relationship [Concerns 
Section 8(1) (e)
 of the Act]
Economic interests [Concerns 
Section 8(1) (a)
 of the Act] C. Contempt Petitions
before the Hon'ble Apex Court: Thereafter, one Mr. Girish Mittal, filed a Contempt
Petition being Contempt Petition No. (C) No.928 of 2016 against RBI and before
the Hon'ble Apex Court inter alia alleging that RBI have withheld certain
information in spite of the directions of the Hon'ble Court in the Judgment of
Jayantilal N. Mistry and therefore they have committed contempt of the
judgement of the Hon'ble Court.
 
Further, another Contempt Petition L.e.,
Contempt Petition (C) No.59 of 2017 was filed against RBI inter alia alleging that
RBI had uploaded a Disclosure Policy dated 30.11.2016 on its website by which the
Public Information Officers were directed not to disclose virtually all kinds of
information, which were in violation of the judgment in 
Jayantilal N. Mistry
 case.


As a result, on 26.04.2019, the Hon'ble Apex Court passed the judgment in 
Girish
Mittal v. Paravati V. Sundaram
, 2019 
SCC OnLine SC 607 (Girish Mittal
 case'),
wherein it was inter alia held that RBI had committed contempt of the Court by
exempting disclosure of information as directed in 
Jayantilal N. Mistry
 case, in its
disclosure policy dated 18.06.2018. Importantly, the Hon'ble Court also stated:


"We are not persuaded to accept the submission of Mr. Gupta that the judgment
dated 16.12.2015 requires reconsideration as we cannot consider the said
submission while deciding the contempt petitions."

B. While the responses dated: 16.12.2019, 30.11.2021, 25.03.2022 given by the
Appellant Bank to notice dated: 03.12.2019, 01.11.2021, 03.01.2022 issued by the
CPIO and FAA RBI were categorical in as much as it cited applicable exemptions
provisions contained in the Act as well as decisions of the Hon'ble CIC/other
forums which squarely cover the subject matter of the instant RTI application,
there has been no discussion/analysis/views recorded by the CPIO or FAA RBI, in
their orders dated: 01.11.2021 and 03.01.2022. The RBI FAA order has only given
emphasis on the Apex court judgment in the 
Mistry
 Case. It is submitted that the
entire information contained in the Document have to be seen as whole in order to
understand the actual impact their disclosure would have on the Bank and to see
as to how, there disclosure would fall within the exemptions provided under

Section 8(1) (a)
, (d). (e) & (j) of the Act. Thus, precise/specific information recorded
in the Documents could not have been culled out, as the entire information in the
Documents are such, which will attract applicability of 
Section 8(1) (a)
, (d), (e.) &


(j) of the Act. The information recorded in the Document was hence requested to
be considered in toto and not in an abstract/standalone form-The same does not
seem to have been done. C. The public disclosure to any applicant who may have

                                           9

 vested interests in the Document received pursuant to the RTI application has the
potential to create panic and spread misinformation. Such Information is thus
exempt under 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act and disclosure whereof would not serve any
larger public interest. Rather, disclosure of such Documents would adversely affect
the position of the banks, including the Appellant bank in a highly competitive
banking sector in our country. D. As has been detailed above, pursuant to the ratio
in 
Jayantilul N. Mistry
 case and the 
Girish Mittal
 case, RBI disclosed complete
RARS, of the Appellant Bank for the years 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, without
complying with the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 or the principles of natural justice,
which actions are completely arbitrary and therefore violative of 
Article 14
 of the
Constitution. The Appellant thus apprehends that the same may be done in the
instant case/as regards the instant Applicant also."




The Respondent, during the hearing, reiterated the contents of their written
submissions which states as under:



"7. It is submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Reserve Bank of India v.
Jayantilal N Mistry & Ors.
 (2016) 3 SCC 525, referred to the stand of RBI on
confidentiality provisions under various statutory enactments. As regards the
nature of information contained in AFI/scrutiny reports or related documents, etc.
for which exemption from disclosure was claimed by the Reserve Bank under
clauses (a), (d) and (e) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, the Supreme Court has
specifically held that since such information is provided to the RBI under the
mandate of law, the claim of exemption is not sustainable.
 
The following
observation of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Reserve Bank of India & Ors. v.
Jayantilal N. Mistry & Ors.
, (2016) 3 SCC 525 is pertinent in this regard "RBI is
supposed to uphold public interest and not the interest of individual banks. RBI is
clearly not in any fiduciary relationship with any bank. RBI has no legal duty to
maximize the benefit of any public sector or private sector bank, and thus there is
no relationship of trust' between them. RBI has a statutory duty to uphold the
interest of the public at large, the depositors, the country's economy and the
banking sector Thus, RBI ought to act with transparency and not hide information
that might embarrass individual banks. It is duty bound to comply with the
provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and disclose the information sought by the respondents
herein7.
 
Further it is also submitted that, in 
Girish Mittal v. Parvathy Sundaram
and Another

Xxxxxxxxx


8. The exemption under 
Section 8 (1)
 () of the 
RTI Act
 has been considered by the
Delhi High Court in 
Naresh Trehan v Rakesh Kumar Gupta
, 216 (2015) DLT 156
wherein it held that the same does not extend to information relating to

                                        10

 companies. 9. It is submitted that it is true that the Supreme Court has by its order
dated September 30, 2022 in IA No. 68597 and IA No. 51632/2021 in WP (Civil)
No. 1159 of 2019 held against the preliminary objection raised on the
maintainability of the pending writ petitions. Consequently, the Supreme Court
will now hear the matter on merit.
 
In our view, this would not mean that the
judgement of the SC in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case does not continue to be governing
the issue.
 
Therefore, it will not be possible for the banks to plead that the
judgement in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case has been 'overruled by the order dated
September 30, 2022".




The Respondent, during the hearing, contended that similar matters are already
remanded back by the Hon'ble Commission and the same was already dealt with,
therefore, such matters should not be remanded back again to the Public
Authority.



Decision:



At the outset, the Commission observes that the Respondent has not specifically
mention the cases details where similar matter was already dealt with by the
Public Authority, therefore, the Commission cannot appreciate the contention of
the Appellant as no identical case was placed on record.



In the facts of the instant case, it is pertinent to note that a decision of a
coordinate bench of the Commission in the matter of various third-party banks vs.
RBI vide File No. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 covers a
detailed discussion inter alia on the same nature of information sought for from
the RBI and the reliance placed by RBI on the 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case. Suffice to say
that the issues raised in the instant case are encapsulated in that same discussion
of the coordinate bench in the following manner:




 
"39. A comprehensive view has to be taken on the objection filed by the
institutions. These objectives has to be deliberated and adjudicated in the light of

Jayantilal Mistry
's case and other judicial pronouncements relevant in such
matter, some of which have been referred by the Commission in the above parts
as well. The Commission while examining various objections realize that the Writ
Petitions filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is seeking directions of
the Supreme Court for non-disclosure of certain aspects of these audit/inspection
report and any such guidance in these Writ Petitions will have direct bearing and
provide further clarity to the CPIO/FAA in adjudicating various aspects of
disclosure/non-disclosure of reports or the information/data which are part of

                                         11

 these reports under the provisions of the 
RTI Act
.
 The Commission takes note that
all the cases/second appeals filed herein are based on interpretations of RBI Vs.
Jayantilal Mistry case and other relevant judicial pronouncements requesting for
full disclosure vis-à-vis with exemptions under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act for non-
disclosure of full or parts of these reports.

 
40. In view of the above observations, the Commission is of the view that
the reports generated in the hands of regulatory public authority in discharge of
its statutory obligations are information under 
Section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act, as the
regulator and the regulated entities are not governed by fiduciary relationship.
The orders of the Commission to their effect has been upheld by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case and the position is unchanged even
today. Various objections filed by banks/financial institutions, to be examined,
analyzed and adjudicated upon, are related to various data and information
submitted to the Reserve Bank of India by these financial institutions explaining
their operations, commercial decisions, clients data etc. under statutory
obligations can be disclosed as such. There are apparently two set of such
information which have been shared by the institutions with the regulator under
statutory obligation. First is the information/data of clients relating to their
business/commercial operations, financial transactions, business and commercial
strategy which is shared by clients with financial institutions in full trust and
confidence and is held by them in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure
under the 
RTI Act
 in their hands. Second set is the information relating to business
strategy, decisions, transactions, other operational data etc. of financial
institutions have been bearing on their competitive position which also enjoys the
exemption from disclosure in their hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise,
under the 
RTI Act
. Some of such data, on case to case basis be sensitive enough for
protection of national interest. The Commission is of the view that the protection
of disclosure of information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of
financial institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in
good faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligation.
 
Various
observations of Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case also does not
indicate so and decision of the regulator to consider redacting such
data/information while disclosing the reports is aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts.


 
41. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of
the CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care
has to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making
reasoned order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and later
in the hands of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be required to
adjudicate such RTI applications in the light of the observations of the Commission

                                         12

 afresh. The Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various
objections filed by the Banks and Financial Institutions and submissions made by
applicant to reach the decision in favour or against redaction of various parts of
the report on case to case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case and other relevant judgments, some of
which have been referred in this order as well. Hence, with these observations the
orders passed by the CPIO and FAA in these matters are set aside and the cases
are being remanded to the CPIO for adjudication afresh. (Emphasis Supplied)


       42. It is amply clear that Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and
others tagged are admitted in Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein guidance and
direction has been sought on non-disclosure of certain type of information which
are essentially the part of the Annual Inspection Report/RAR, etc. These petitions
also seek protection of interim communication between regulator and the
regulated entity in the process of finalization of these reports or otherwise. It is
obvious that decision in these Writ Petitions will provide clarity and guidance to
the Public Authority on redaction/non-disclosure of a set of information inspite of
being part of these reports which are open to disclosure. At this stage, any
decision by the Public Authority will amount to pre-judging the issues pending
admitted Writ Petitions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Various banks,
financial institutions, respondent public authority and the RTI applicant have
already impleaded party and are presenting their arguments before the Apex
Court.

       43. Hence, any decision of redaction or disclosure of information, without
waiting for decision in the Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged may cause irrevocable damage against right of privacy and protection of
commercial interest. Hence, the respondent public authority if expedient may
wait for the outcome in Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged or seek clarification from the Hon'ble Court and accordingly decide these
RTI applications by following process as enumerated in the earlier paras by the
Commission in the interest of principles of natural justice. While disclosing the
information they should be cautious in taking a considerate view balancing right
to privacy, protection of national and commercial interest on one hand vis-à-vis
larger public interest. (Emphasis Supplied)

 
44. It is further observed that similar view has also been taken by the
Division Bench of the Commission in file bearing nos. CIC/VS/A/2013/001488 and
CIC/VS/A/2013/001805 dated 11.05.2017 wherein the Commission observed that
'Having considered the submissions of both the parties, the Commission observes
that since a similar issue is pending adjudication before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the matter of Central for 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. &Ors.
, it would be judicious to await the final

                                        13

 outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court. However, on receipt of the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter, the appellant shall be at
liberty to file second appeal afresh, if he so desires. The instant appeals are
disposed of'."




The above decision is therefore applicable to the instant case and no separate line
of adjudication is warranted in the matter. The stipulations contained in File No.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 stands endorsed to the
Respondent CPIO with emphasis on para 41 & 43 supplied as above .



                   The appeal (s) are disposed of accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                        14