[Cites 
20
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Ajai Bamnehwal vs Reserve Bank Of India on 30 June, 2022


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                           के   ीयसूचनाआयोग
                      Central Information Commission
                          बाबागंगनाथमाग ,मुिनरका
                       Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                       नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीयअपीलसं या/Second Appeal No. CIC/RBIND/A/2020/106462

CIC/RBIND/A/2021/139304 and CIC/RBIND/A/2021/643060

Mr. Harjinder Singh                               ... अपीलकता /Appellant

RBL Bank
Through Authorized Signatory,
Mr. Sankalp Srivastava

Bank of India,
Through Authorized Signatory,
Mr. Ajay Bamnehwal

                                 VERSUS
                                  बनाम
CPIO                                              ... ितवादी/Respondent
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Supervision
Central Office, 2nd Floor, Centre-1
Cuffe Parade, Colaba, Mumbai-400005

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:-

                                                       SA      : 06-02-
RTI : 16-08-2019, 23-      FA : 22-10-2019, 05-
                                                       2020, 21-09-
08-2019                    08-2021& 28-07-2021
                                                       2021&16-09-2021
                                                       Hearing: 21-02-2022,
CPIO : 10-10-2019, 20-     FAO : Not on Record,
                                                       16-11-2021, 30-09-
07-2021& 23-07-2021        25-08-2021& 17-08-2021
                                                       2021 &27-06-2022


                                                                   Page 1 of 11
                                  ORDER

CIC/RBIND/A/2020/106462

1.    The above mentioned matter had been listed before the Commission for
hearing on 21-02-2022, wherein the Commission made following observations:-



     "The said concerned banks i.e. M/s RBL Bank Limited and Bank of India
     has filed firstappeal against the reply of CPIO but the FAA had dismissed
     the first appeals ofthe said banks. Thereafter, the said banks had filed
     second        appeal     before      theCommission        bearings      nos.

     CIC/RBIND/A/2021/139304 and CIC/RBIND/A/2021/643060which are
     pending before the Commission. The Commission is of the view that
     before reaching to any conclusion inthe matter, the said above second
     appeals should also be clubbed along with thispresent second appeal so
     that all the parties be heard together. Inview ofthis, the matter is
     adjourned. The parties are directed to file their writtensubmissions, if any
     before the next date of hearing."



CIC/RBIND/A/2021/139304

2.    The above mentioned matter had been listed before the Commission for
hearing on 16-11-2021, wherein the Commission made following observations:-



     "The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the
     case, and perusal of records, acceded to the request of the appellant bank
     seeking stay on the CPIO's order 20.07.2021 and FAA's order
     25.08.2021. The appellant is directed to file their written submissions
     before the Commission after servingcopiesthereof upon the respondent
     within three weeks. The respondents may also file their counter
     submissions within three weeks from the date of receipt of the
     submissions from the appellant bank. It may be noted that the matter
     involves substantial questions of law determination of which require
     detailed submissions from the parties as well as their presence either in
     person or through video conference. In view of this, the operation of the
     CPIO's reply dated 20.07.2021 and FAA's order dated 25.08.2021shall
     remain stayed till further orders."



                                                                      Page 2 of 11


 CIC/RBIND/A/2021/643060


3.    The above mentioned matter had been listed before the Commission for
hearing on 30-09-2021, wherein the Commission made following observations:-



      "The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the
      case, and perusal of records, observes that the appellant bank has prayed
      for interim order restraining the CPIO from releasing the information in
      terms of prayer i.e., the appellant would suffer irreparable loss if the
      information is disclosed. In terms of the prayer, the second appeal is
      admitted and keeping in view of the urgency, the operation of the CPIO's
      reply dated 23.07.2021 and FAA's order dated 17.08.2021 mentioned in
      para 1 are stayed till further orders. The matter may be posted for
      hearing as soon as possible."



Hearing:

4.     Adv. Anand Shankar Jha and Adv. Arpit Gupta(Counsels for the RBL
Bank), Adv. Mili Verma (Counsel for Bank of India) along with Shri
Pushpendra Singh, Sr. Manager (Law), O/o Bank of India attended the hearing
in person. The respondent, Shri Vinod Kumar, Representative of CPIO/Deputy
General Manager attended the hearing through video-conferencing. The original
RTI applicant Shri Harjinder Singh attended the hearing in person.

5.     The written submissions of the parties are taken on record.

6.     The Counsel for the Appellant Banks has referred the reply provided by
CPIO and order passed by the FAA and submitted that the CPIO, RBI and FAA
had violated the principles of natural justice, as they had not given any personal
hearing to the Appellant Bank before passing their decisions in the matter. No
reasons were given for not offering personal hearing in the first appeal. The
counsel for the appellant prayed before the Commission that the FAA order
should be set-aside for want of reasons. The FAA in its order has mentioned
that the interim order passed in 
Reserve Bank of India vs. Jayantilal Mistry &
Ors.
 would apply only to those banks which are parties to the petition,namely,
HDFC Bank Limited, Axis Bank Limited, ICICI Bank, Yes Bank Limited and
State Bank of India. As the appellant banks were not a party 
in that case
, it
would not be possible for the appellant banks to take benefit of that order.He
further submitted that the information sought by the RTI applicant was


                                                                       Page 3 of 11

 completely exempted as the information sought includes commercial
information received in fiduciary capacity, disclosure of information sought is
specifically prohibited under various legislations and is specifically exempted
under 
Section 8 (1) (a)
, 
8 (1) (b)
, 
8(1) (d)
, 
8(1) (g)
 and 
8(1) (j)
 of the RTI Act.
The disclosure of personal/ commercial information of the banks and its
customers violated the right to privacy as guaranteed under the Right to life as
enshrined under the 
Article 21
 of the Constitution of India. Such
disclosurewould cause serious prejudice to the market value andreputation of
the Appellant Bank and its customers. The Counsel has further referred the Full
Bench judgment of this Hon'ble Commission passed in file no.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460& Ors. vide order dated 05.05.2022 wherein an
identical issue of disclosure of Inspection Report, has remanded the matters to
the CPIO for fresh adjudication by keeping in mind principles of natural justice.
Moreover, considering the fact that several banks have filed inter alia Writ
Petition No. 1159 of 2019& Ors tagged with it before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court inter-alia impugning the disclosure of their Inspection Reports or parts
thereof by the RBI under the 
RTI Act
, this Hon'ble Commission has also held
that any decision by the CPIO in respect of disclosure of Inspection Report
would amount to pre-judging the issues pending the admitted Writ Petition (s)
before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.


7.     The Counsel for Bank of India further submitted that the CPIO and FAA
have passed their decisions in favour of RTI Applicant, ignoring the previous
order passed by the Hon'ble CIC in 
Amitava Choudhary vs. Canara Bank
 &
other Banks, and also the fact that a similar case, which is applicable to these
cases, is pending before Hon'ble Supreme Court for final consideration, (
Public
Interest Litigation vs. Housing & Urban Development Corporation & Ors. Writ
Petition
 (s) (C) No. 573/2003 and the Hon'ble Court has accepted he
information of borrowers only through a sealed cover.


8.     The representative of the Reserve Bank of India while presenting their
case inter alia submitted that the applicant, Shri Harjinder Singh, vide his RTI
applications inter alia, sought, list of defaulters of Appellant Banks etc. They
further submitted that the then CPIO issued the notice under 
Section 11(1)
 read
with 
Section 11(2)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005 
(RTI Act
) to the third
party i.e. appellant banks informing that RBI was required to disclose the
information sought by Shri Harjinder Singh enabling appellant to make written

                                                                        Page 4 of 11

 submission within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice as to whether
the information sought by the applicant might be disclosed or not along with
reasons for the same. After considering the response from Appellant Banks, the
CPIO decided to disclose the list of defaulters of Appellant Banks etc. to the
applicant. He further submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in RBI vs.
Jayantilal N. Mistry & Ors (2016) 3 SCC 525 observed that :-

       "RBI is clearly not in any fiduciary relationship with any bank. RBI
       ought to act with transparency and not hide information that might
       embarrass individual banks. It is duty bound to comply with the
       provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and disclose the information sought by the
       applicant."

The FAA also observed that the list of borrowers as reported under CRILC by
banks forms part of the record maintained by the Reserve Bank and the same is
in the possession of the Reserve Bank. Hence the same may be disclosed by
RBI. The FAA concluded that there was no merit in the appeal of the appellant
and accordingly dismissed the bank's appeal.The respondent further contended
that in order to withhold any information sought by the applicant under the 
RTI
Act
, such information should fall within any of the exempted items under

Section 8
 and 
9
 of the RTI Act. The respondent also contended that the list of
such defaulters is reported every quarter along with their names and amount
outstanding. It is an automatic compilation and such information is readily
available with the Reserve Bank of India.

9.     The original applicant Mr. Harjinder Singh submitted that the information
sought should have been provided by the bank within 30 days in compliance
with the 
RTI Act, 2005
 and the orders given by Hon'ble Supreme Court,
Hon'ble Commission. But the above information was knowingly not made
available by the bank within the mandatory period of 30 days prescribed in law.
By doing so, the provisions of 
RTI Act, 2005
 and the order given by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Reserve Bank of India vs. Jayantilal N. Mistry & Ors

bearing T. P. (Civil) No. 91/2015, Contempt Petition No. 928/2016 and the
order given by the Commission in Appeal no. 23/2019 has been violated by the
bank.He further submitted that RBI is supposed to uphold public interest and
not the interest of individual banks. RBI is clearly not in fiduciary relationship
with any bank. RBI has no legal duty to maximize the benefit of any public
sector or private sector bank and thus there is no relationship of 'trust' between

                                                                       Page 5 of 11

 them. RBI has a statutory duty to upload the interest of the public at large, the
depositors, the country's economy and the banking sector. Thus, RBI ought to
act with transparency and not hide information that might embarrass individual
banks. It is the duty bound to comply with the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and
disclose the information sought by the applicant.




Decision:

10. The Commission, after hearing the submissions of both the parties and
after perusal of records, observes that the original RTI applicant has sought
information regarding the names, address, firm and total amount due (principal
amount of loan taken + Amount of interest payable on loan taken) of the top
100 bank defaulters of country. He has further asked information regarding the
total number of bank defaulters in the country who have taken a loan of Rs. One
Crore or more from the banks.The Counsels for the appellant banks have sought
adjournment on the ground that the copy of second appeal bearing file
no.CIC/RBIND/A/2020/106462 which is filed by original applicant Shri
Harjinder Singh has not been received by them. However, the Commission has
gone through the interim order passed in the said case and found that the copy
of second appeal in the said case has duly served to the appellant
banks.Therefore, the request for adjournment is being rejected and the above
mentioned matters are being disposed of by way of the present order.

11. The Commission observes that the CPIO, Reserve Bank of India had
issued notices under 
Section 11(1)
 and 
11(3)
 to the appellant banks intending to
disclose the information. Aggrieved by the decision of the CPIO, the appellant
banks had filed first appeal with the First Appellate Authority. The FAA had
also dismissed the first appeal of the appellant banks summarily. The
Commission observes that the RTI applicant had insisted for disclosure of
information as per Jayantilal N. Mistry's case. The Appellant Bank contested
that the information sought as a whole is exempted from disclosure under

Section 8 (1) (a)
, 
8 (1) (b)
, 
8(1) (d)
, 
8(1) (g)
 and 
8(1) (j)
 of the RTI Act and that
the CPIO/FAA has not passed any reasoned order settling their objections nor
gave any opportunity of hearing to them.

12. The Commission takes note of the submissions made by the Bank that the
information, proposed to be disclosed is in the nature of credit information and
the same was supplied to the Reserve Bank of India in fiduciary capacity as the

                                                                          Page 6 of 11

 Regulator under the provisions of the 
Banking Regulation Act
 as well as the

Credit Information Companies Regulation Act, 2005
 (CICRA). Under the
provisions of CICRA there is a specific bar on the disclosure of such credit
information. Further 
Section 174 (a)
 of the Act, clearly mentions that "no credit
information shall be disclosed to any person other than its specified users."The
large amount of data relating to its clients including their identity, personal
details etc. is shared with the regulator, without any redaction or withholding
the information, in good faith that these will be objectively analysed in
discharge of their statutory obligations to make fair judgment on their
functioning without affecting their competitive position.To this extent, there is
an element of trust and confidence in sharing the data, both financial and
operational, between the RBI and the bank. The information and data of the
clients in the hands of Bank also has the element of trust and confidence that
such data will not be disclosed or shared against their right to
privacy/commercial interest.

13. There are apparently two set of such information which have been shared
by the bank with the regulator under statutory obligation. First is the
information/data of clients relating to their business/commercial operations,
financial transactions, business and commercial strategy which is shared by
clients with financial institutions in full trust and confidence and is held by them
in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure under the 
RTI Act
 in their
hands. Second set is the information relating to business strategy, decisions,
transactions, other operational data etc. of financial institution which may have
bearing on their competitive position and also enjoys the exemption from
disclosure in their hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise, under the 
RTI
Act
. The Commission is of the view that the exemption of disclosure of certain
information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of financial
institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in good
faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligations. This aspect is not
the ratio of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's judgment and
decision of the regulator to consider redacting such data/information while
disclosing the reports is to be aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts covering such aspects.

14. The Commission further observes that orders simpliciter irrespective of
the different objections raised by the appellant banks apparently lacked

                                                                         Page 7 of 11

 application of mind or reasons on the part of the CPIO. Reasons for rejection or
acceptance of the specific objections raised by them has not been spelt out in the
order which has been passed without giving an opportunity of hearing to
them.The Commission further observes that the CPIO is free to take decisions
on disclosure of information as per provision of 
RTI Act, 2005
 giving a
reasoned orders on the objections filed. The CPIO while issuing notice under

Section 11
 of the RTI Act has given the opportunity to the Appellant Bank to
file their objections, if any, against disclosure of information sought but has not
found it necessary to give them an opportunity of hearing. While not doing so,
the CPIO has not passed any reasoned order covering his deliberations on their
objections, his understanding of law or jurisprudence in deciding specific
objections, in favor of disclosure etc. Order passed by the CPIO is cryptic,
without any reference to objections raised by the Appellant Bank. Similarly, the
FAA instead of passing a speaking order have also given a cryptic orderto the
Appellant Bank. The CPIO and the FAA are expected to apply their mind and
pass reasoned order elaborating reasons for accepting /not accepting their
objections in his decisionbefore issuing the intent of disclosing the information.
Further, no opportunity of personal hearing was given to the appellant nor
speaking order have been passed by FAA for not giving such opportunity of
hearing. The Commission is of the view that every objection should be dealt and
rejected/accepted with a reason and reasons for not giving opportunity of
personal hearing should be well reasoned too in view of wider implications.

15. The Commission observes that rightful claims of the RTI applicant has to
be adjudicated in the light of specific objections filed by the Appellant Bank,
various judicial pronouncements of Hon'ble Supreme Court and High Courts
providing guidance on such matters. Opportunity of hearing should necessarily
be provided and orders passed by the CPIO and the FAA otherwise should be
reasoned, speaking and clear. In the present case, such order should enumerate
the principles for disclosure or non-disclosure of list of defaulters of Appellant
Bank or various types of data, personal information, commercially sensitive
information of clients or institution, specifically excluded disclosures under
various Acts, etc.

16. In light of the above observations and considering all the facts and
circumstances of the above mentioned cases, the Commission is of the view that
contour of the arguments are identical as held in the Full Bench judgment of this

                                                                        Page 8 of 11

 Hon'ble Commission passed in file no. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460& Ors.
videorder dated 05.05.2022. It has been observed that there are minor variations
in the matters in hand when compared with the matters already decided by the
Commission as above.

17. It has already been stated supra that detailed view in file nos.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 & Ors. dated 05.05.2022 wherein issues of
redaction, ratio of 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case and other related issues are discussed
in detail. Perusal of the relevant paragraphs in Jayantilal Mistry judgment make
it clear that the fundamental rights enshrined upon the citizens in form of right
to information are not absolute and that the right to information may not draw
precedence over right to privacy. Therefore, the Courts need to strike a balance
between the rights as well as protections guaranteed to a citizen under 
Article 19

of the Constitution. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held that the disclosure
of information relating to banks may be allowed taking into account the
circumstances and nature of information sought for and not in a blanket manner.
The Commission advised the CPIO to consider taking the relevant references
from the said order while deciding the above mentioned cases.


18. Further, the Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the
conduct of the CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the
opinion that due care has to be taken by according opportunity of personal
hearing and making reasoned order with reference to the objections in the hands
of the CPIO and later in the hands of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the
CPIO will be required to adjudicate such RTI applications in the light of the
observations of the Commission afresh. The Commission also expects that the
CPIO will take view on various objections filed by the Appellant and
submissions made by applicant to reach the decision in favor or against on case
to case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in

Jayantilal Mistry
 case, Commission's judgment dated 05.05.2022 and other
relevant judgments, some of which have been referred in this order as well.
Hence, with these observations the order passed by the CPIO and FAA in these
matters is set aside and the case is being remanded to the CPIO for adjudication
afresh in line with the Commission full bench decision passed in file nos.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 & Ors. dated 05.05.2022. In case, the
appellant/applicant is aggrieved with the order of the CPIO, they are at the


                                                                       Page 9 of 11

 liberty to file first appeal before the First Appellate Authority and afterwards
second appeal before the Commission.


19. Furthermore, since the respondent has sent the notice under 
section 11
 to
all the concerned banks, however few of them have approached the Commission
through present second appeals and second appeals, if filed, by the other banks
are not known to the Commission. Therefore, if other banks regarding whom
the information is being sought would approach the Commission, the decision
passed in the above matters would be applicable to them as well.

20. With the above observations, all the above appeals are disposed of.

21. Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.


                                                              नीरजकु मारगु ा)
                                          Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरजकु       ा
                                                                 सूचनाआयु )
                                       Information Commissioner (सू

                                                       दनांक / Date : 27-06-2022
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणतस यािपत ित)

S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा ),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),
(011-26105682)

Addresses of the parties:
1.    CPIO
      Reserve Bank of India
      Department of Supervision
      Central Office, 2nd Floor, Centre-1
      Cuffe Parade, Colaba, Mumbai-400005


2.    Sankalp Srivastava (Appellant)





                                                                     Page 10 of 11

 3.   Ajay Bamnewal (Appellant)

4.   Mr.Harjinder Singh (Original Applicant)





                                               Page 11 of 11