[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Adarsh Kumar Dua vs Office Of The Registrar Cooperative ... on 28 January, 2026


                                   के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                            Central Information Commission
                                 बाबा गंगनाथ माग,मुिनरका
                             Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                              नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067
ि तीय अपील सं     ा / Second Appeal No. CIC/RECOS/A/2024/139453

 Adarsh Kumar Dua                                           ... अपीलकता/Appellant

                                    VERSUS
                                     बनाम
 CPIO
 Registrar of Co-Operative
 Societies, GNCTD                                         ... ितवादीगण/Respondent

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:

 RTI : 20.08.2024             FA    : 30.09.2024            SA      : 09.12.2024

 CPIO : 25.09.2024            FAO : Not on record           Hearing : 13.01.2026


Date of Decision: 28.01.2026

                                     CORAM
                Chief Information Commissioner: RAJ KUMAR GOYAL
                                     ORDER



1.     The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 20.08.2024, before the CPIO, Registrar
of Co-Operative Societies, GNCTD, seeking information regarding Bannu Biradari CGHS
Ltd. Pitampura, as under:

       "Please provide me from your records the Break-up of the miscellaneous expenses
of Rs.68,990/- in the Balance Sheet for F.Y. 2021-2022.

       (a) Please provide from your records legible & certified copies of cash memos,
vouchers, cheques issued with name of bank, cheque no. amount, date of issue, name of
the person/shop/firm to whom issued,



Page 1 of 8                                        Second Appeal No. CIC/RECOS/A/2024/139453


        (b) Please provide the information in which area/areas & details of work/works was
done & during which period (e.g. w.e.f to.....)

       (c) Please provide me with a copy of the monthly executive meeting minutes &
agenda in which these works & expenditure was approved."



2.    The CPIO & Assistant Registrar GH/Sec-I, RCS, replied to the RTI Application vide
letter dated 25.09.2024, as under:



       "The information sought under the 
RTI Act, 2005
 by the applicant is not available
within the records kept in the -concerned file of the society with the section."



3. Dissatisfied with the reply received from the CPIO, the Appellant filed a First Appeal
dated 30.09.2024. The FAA's order, if any, is not available on record.



4.   Aggrieved with the non-receipt of the FAA's order, the Appellant approached the
Commission with the instant Second Appeal dated 09.12.2024.



Hearing Proceedings & Decision


5.     The Appellant was present during the hearing in person. On behalf of the
Respondent, a Senior Assistant sought to represent the case. The prayer of the said official
was found to be in contravention of para 3(a) & (b) of the notice of hearing issued on
09.12.2025, therefore, the Bench took exception and denied him leave to plead/represent
the CPIO.



6.     The Appellant's contentions were gathered from the grounds of the second appeal,
primarily contending that RCS has the authority and wherewithal to access the records of
the averred Society, and that the extant DCS Rules, 2007 stipulates the nature of records
ought to be retained for definite periods of time by RCS.



7.     The Commission took on record the written submissions dated 12.01.2026 filed by
Satish Kumar, CPIO & Assistant Registrar, GH/SEC-1, RCS, GNCTD, as under:



Page 2 of 8                                         Second Appeal No. CIC/RECOS/A/2024/139453


        "1. That the undersigned is in receipt of the notice dated 09.12.2025 whereby it has
been directed to submit written submission in respect of RTI application dated 20.08.2024
which was filed by Sh. Adarsh Kumar Dua.



       2. It is most respectfully submitted that this office has already been given reply to
appellant within time period as per provision of 
RTI Act, 2005
 on dated 25.09.2024(copy
enclosed). The information sought by the applicant is part and parcel of the
working/functioning of the Managing Committee of the society and the records related to
the same are in the custody of the Managing Committee only.



       3. However, notably, a CPIO is only obligated to provide information that is "held"

by the public authority. The records pertaining to expanses, vouchers of payments made
etc are internal documents of the society and are not part of the routine filings submitted
to the RCS office. The RCS cannot be turned into a "collection agency" for a member's
private grievance.



 
4. Notably in this reference, Supreme Court in Thalappalam Ser. 
Coop. Bank Ltd.
v. State of Kerala
 (2013): has held that cooperative societies are not public authorities.
While the Registrar can "access" information under certain laws, the Court clarified that
this power should be exercised for regulatory or public interest purposes, not to satisfy the
private curiosity or personal disputes of individual members.




       5. Besides, the applicant is a member of the Society and, therefore, is bound by the

DCS Act, 2003
. Under Section 139 of the DCS Act, the member has a specific, faster, and
direct statutory right to inspect the very records they are seeking (minutes of meetings,
attendance, etc.). In case the any member is denied access to such records, the same
section of the act under its clause (2) provides for effective remedy too. The said section is
reproduced as under:



       Right to information.



       139. (1) Any member or creditor having interest in the affairs of the co-operative
       society may seek information relating to any transaction of the co-operative society
       and for that purpose may be provided a certified copy of any document within thirty

Page 3 of 8                                          Second Appeal No. CIC/RECOS/A/2024/139453

        days from the date of receipt of application relating to such transaction on payment
       of such fee as may be specified.



       (2) Where a member or creditor having interest in affairs of a society seeking
       information prefers an appeal to the Registrar stating that the officer of the society
       without any reasonable cause, has refused to receive his application for providing
       information or has not furnished information within the time specified under sub-
       section (1) or has refused the request for information or knowingly given incorrect
       information or obstructed in any manner in furnishing the information, the
       Registrar, after affording a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the officer of
       the society and the appellant, may either reject the appeal; or direct the officer of
       the society to furnish information within the period specified in the order or such
       extended period as may be allowed, and in case of default the Registrar may impose
       a penalty of two hundred and fifty rupees each day till the information is furnished,
       so however, the total amount of such penalty shall not exceed ten thousand rupees
       which shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue in case of default in payment.



 
6. Further in this regard, the following case law may kindly be referred: Delhi High
Court in 
Vimla Dhiman v. State
 (2013): Wherein, the court noted that when a special law

(DCS Act, 2003
) provides for a specific remedy or offense, it should be prioritized over
general provisions 
(RTI Act, 2005
, in this case.)


 
7. Thus, by filing this appeal before the Hon'ble CIC, and by filing repeated RTIs
against the RCS pertaining to such matters, the applicant is intentionally bypassing the
procedures 
laid down in
 the DCS Act/Bye-laws. This constitutes an "abuse of the process
of law" as it puts an undue administrative burden on the RCS office to act as an
intermediary for documents that the applicant can legally demand directly, of course, by
proving that the applicant while seeking such desired information is serving the larger
public interest/or has interest in the affairs of the society and not individual/personal
interest. Further, as per 
Section 7(9)
 of the RTI Act in case RCS is forced to fetch, verify,
and photocopy voluminous records (like years of minutes/attendance), it would
unnecessarily disproportionately divert the resources of the public authority.


Page 4 of 8                                         Second Appeal No. CIC/RECOS/A/2024/139453


        8. Therefore, on the basis of above, as the information sought is not physically held
in the records of the RCS office, the applicant, being a member, has a direct right of
inspection under 
Section 139
 of the DCS Act, 2003, which he has failed to exercise, for the
reasons best known to him only; and the PIO is not withholding information, rather is
asking the applicant to follow the "due process" of the law. Hon'ble CIC may be requested
to dispose of the matter and may also be requested to issue strict warning to the applicant
for misusing the provisions of 
RTI Act
, unnecessarily burdening the resources of the public
Authority.



       9. Accordingly, it is humbly requested to set aside the said notice."



8.     The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case, observes
that the CPIO's reply does not specifically mention as to why this information could not
be accessed from the Bannu Biradari CGHS Ltd. Pitampura, keeping in view the
harmonious reading of 
Section 2(f)
 and 
2(j)
 of the RTI Act. The CPIO has chosen to
convey to the Appellant that, the information could be sought from the 'PIO of the
concerned Society U/s 139 of 
DCS Act, 2003
'. Further, the sum and substance of the
CPIO's written submissions is that the Appellant has an alternate mechanism to access the
information under 
Section 139
 of the DCS Act, 2003. It is also argued that as per the Apex
Court's ruling dated 07.10.2013, in the matter of Thalappalam Ser. 
Coop. Bank Ltd. and
others vs. State of Kerala & Ors. CIVIL APPEAL No.
 9017 OF 2013 (2013), the Registrar
can access information of the cooperative societies under certain laws but only for
'regulatory or public interest purposes, not to satisfy the private curiosity or personal
disputes of individual members.'


9.     
In respect of the CPIO's contention that an alternate mechanism to access the
information is available to the Appellant, a judgment of the Apex Court dated 11.04.2019,
in the matter of 
Institute of Companies Secretaries of India vs. Paras Jain, CIVIL
APPEAL No.
 5665/2014, is found relevant and applicable in terms of an obiter dictum for
the instant matter, as the Court held-




Page 5 of 8                                         Second Appeal No. CIC/RECOS/A/2024/139453


          "10. Thus it is clear that the avenue for seeking certified copies as well as inspection
is provided both in the 
Right to Information Act
 as well as the statutory guidelines of the
appellant.



         12. Be that as it may, Guideline no.3 of the appellant does not take away from Rule
4, The Right to Information (Regulation of Fees and Cost) Rules, 2005 which also
entitles the candidates to seek inspection and certified copies of their answer
scripts. In our opinion, the existence of these two avenues is not mutually exclusive and
it is up to the candidate to choose either of the routes....." Emphasis Supplied


10.      Similarly, per contra to the contention of the CPIO in the context of the
Thalappalam (supra) judgment, the Commission notes that the Apex Court in the said
judgment observed and held as under:



      "52. Registrar of Cooperative Societies functioning under the 
Cooperative Societies
Act
 is a public authority within the meaning of 
Section 2(h)
 of the Act. As a public
authority, Registrar of Co-operative Societies has been conferred with lot of statutory
powers under the respective Act under which he is functioning. He is also duty bound to
comply with the obligations under the 
RTI Act
 and furnish information to a citizen under
the 
RTI Act
. Information which he is expected to provide is the information enumerated
in 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act subject to the limitations provided under 
Section 8
 of the Act.
Registrar can also, to the extent law permits, gather information from a Society, on
which he has supervisory or administrative control under the 
Cooperative Societies Act
.
Consequently, apart from the information as is available to him, under 
Section 2(f)
, he
can also gather those information from the Society, to the extent permitted by law.
Registrar is also not obliged to disclose those information if those information fall
under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act...." Emphasis Supplied


11.      Now, it is gathered from the archives of the Commission that in one such earlier
matter of the Appellant, decided on 18.08.2025 vide Second Appeal No.
CIC/RECOS/A/2024/108176, after hearing the CPIO of the Respondent office along with
the representatives of the averred Cooperative society, in respect of a RTI Application


Page 6 of 8                                            Second Appeal No. CIC/RECOS/A/2024/139453

 dated 31.10.2023, seeking similar nature of records from RCS as requested in the instant
RTI Application, directions were issued as under:



       "11. In furtherance of hearing proceedings, the Respondent is directed to facilitate
opportunity of inspection of relevant records at the Bannu Biradari Cooperative CGHS
Ltd, Pitampura, Delhi through his authorized officer, to the Appellant on a mutually
decided date and time within four weeks from the date of receipt of this order. Before
giving a date to the appellant, the Respondent should supply him a list of files connected
with the query in the RTI application giving File Nos., Subject of the file, and total number
of pages of correspondence in each file. Further, on the day of inspection, all relevant
records must be brought at one place to facilitate inspection and not make the Appellant
run around various departments of the Respondent Public Authority. Intimation of date
and time should be sent to the Appellant well in advance in writing. Copy of records as
may be desired by the Appellant be provided to him upon receipt of requisite fees as per
RTI Rules. Information which are exempt under the 
RTI Act
 may be redacted/severed."



12.    In view of the foregoing, the Commission directs the CPIO to ensure that the action
ordered       vide   decision     dated     18.08.2025      in     Second      Appeal       No.
CIC/RECOS/A/2024/108176 is carried out in the same manner with respect to the
instant RTI Application. The said direction shall be complied with by the CPIO within
six weeks of the receipt of this order, under intimation to the Commission.



13.    Furthermore, the Commission takes exception to the absence of the CPIO or an
authorized representative (in terms of para 3(a) & (b) of the notice of hearing issued on
09.01.2026) during the hearing, without any advance prayer for leave, instead, seeking to
'set aside the notice', vide para 9 of the written submissions of the CPIO (reproduced
verbatim under para 7 above). Now, therefore, the CPIO is directed to send an explanation,
stating the reasons for acting in defiance of the stipulations contained in the notice of
hearing dated 09.01.2026. The said written explanation of the CPIO must reach the
Commission, within two weeks of the receipt of this order, without fail. The CPIO shall
note that recurrence of similar lapses/laxity in the future will attract stringent action as per
the provisions of the 
RTI Act
.

Page 7 of 8                                           Second Appeal No. CIC/RECOS/A/2024/139453


 14.    It is further relevant to observe that the FAA has also abdicated its statutory duty
under the 
RTI Act
 to decide the instant First Appeal, which renders the channel of First
Appeal redundant.



15.    A copy of this order is endorsed to the FAA to take note of the observations of
the Commission at para 14 above and to ensure that First Appeal(s) are decided as
per the mandate of the 
RTI Act
, without fail.



16.    The Appeal is disposed of accordingly.



       A copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.



                                                                                 Sd/-

                                               (Raj Kumar Goyal) (राज कुमार गोयल)
                                Chief Information Commissioner (मु   सूचना आयु )
                                                            िदनां क/Date: 28.01.2026


Authenticated true copy

Bijendra Kumar (िबज कुमार)
Dy. Registrar (उप पं जीयक)
011-26186535





Page 8 of 8                                         Second Appeal No. CIC/RECOS/A/2024/139453

                                    Recomendation(s) to PA under 
section 25(5)
 of the RTI Act, 2005:-



                                   Nil




Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)