[Cites 
18
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Chayan Ghosh Chowdhury vs Parliament Of India on 28 December, 2022


Author: 
Vanaja N Sarna


Bench: 
Vanaja N Sarna


                          क य सुचना आयोग
                   CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
                            बाबा गंगनाथ माग
                           Baba Gangnath Marg
                       मु नरका, नई द ल - 110067
                       Munirka, New Delhi-110067

                                         File no.: - CIC/PAROI/A/2022/663820
In the matter of
Chayan Ghosh Chowdhury
                                                                ... Appellant
                                         VS
Central Public Information Officer
Rajya Sabha Secretariat
Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi - 110 001
                                                                ...Respondent


RTI application filed on             :   28/07/2021
CPIO replied on                      :   02/09/2021
First appeal filed on                :   12/09/2021
First Appellate Authority order      :   28/10/2021
Second Appeal dated                  :   31/12/2021
Date of Hearing                      :   27/12/2022
Date of Decision                     :   27/12/2022

The following were present:

Appellant: Present over phone (As Train was cancelled; his request for audio
hearing was accepted)
Respondent: Mohd Salamuddin, Additional Director and rep. of CPIO, present
over VC

Information Sought:

The appellant has sought the following information with reference to the
judgment passed by the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in RSA 106/2017 dated
03/08/2017 - 
titled Rajya Sabha Secretariat Vs P S Verma
:


1.     The name of the counsel and the amount of fees incurred by the
Secretariat for contesting the case in:

a. Trial Court

                                          1

 b. First Appellate Court
c. Delhi High Court



2.     Whether the directions of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court have been
complied with? If yes then:

a.     Provide the evidence of the same. (the order was not related to the
appellant but a third party and hence, the compliance of the Court's direction
and payment details is personal to that third party and hence, exempted
 u/s
8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act. )
b.     Provide name & designation of the official who directed/ opined filing of
the above referred appeal before the Hon'ble Delhi High Court.

3.     And other related information.

Grounds for filing Second Appeal:

The CPIO did not provide the desired information.

Submissions made by Appellant and Respondent during Hearing:

The appellant reiterated the contents of his second appeal. He also relied on
two    orders     of   the    CIC,   viz    CIC/NIACL/A/2016/305580       and
CIC/BKOBD/A/2017/161908 dated 11.07.2017 and 14.03.2019.
The appellant in his second appeal relied on a decision in File No.:
CIC/UGCOM/A/2019/639673 dated 09/09/2020 (Dr S Garg Vs UGC), where the
Commission has held as follows:

      ".................Here it is brought to the notice of the FAA that deciding an
      appeal after rendering an opportunity of hearing to the parties is a
      fundamental principle of jurisprudence. It is conducive to fairness and
      transparency and is in line with the principles of natural justice. As per
      
Section 19(6)
 of the RTI Act, the FAA is required to dispose of an appeal
      within 30 days of the receipt thereof and as far as possible also give the
      appellant as well as third party an opportunity of hearing specially if he
      so requests, without forgetting that the essence of the 
RTI Act
 is to
      provide complete, correct and timely information to the appellant."
In the instant case, the FAA was specifically requested to grant an opportunity
of personal hearing before disposal of the Appeal. The justified request was
rejected. He alleged that the FAA order was passed in breach of principles of
natural justice, and is illegal and liable to be set aside.



                                       2


 He further submitted that the CPIO refused to part with the complete
information. Thus, partial information was concealed. Thus the refusal of
complete & true information is malafide and opposed to principles of
transparency.

He also submitted that it is well settled that information can only be refused if
the same is exempted under Sec 8(1) of the Act. Sec 7(9) of the Act is not an
exemption clause, as invoked by the FAA at a belated stage.
To buttress his argument, he relied on the decision in Appeal No.
CIC/WB/A/2007/00528-SM dated 10.8.2007, where the Commission has held
as follows:

       "...............It is true that the 
Section 7(9)
 provides that information sought
      in a particular form should be provided in that form unless it would
      disproportionately divert the resources of the public authority or would
      be detrimental to preservation of record in question. That means, the
      public authority concerned should provide the information sought in a
      different form if he thinks, on reasonable grounds, that the form in which
      it has been sought would disproportionately divert the resources of the
      public authority. This provision in 
Section 7
 is not a license to deny
      information." (emphasis added)
He submitted that in view of the above, the refusal of counsel fees by invoking
Sec 7(9) of the Act is unjustified & misplaced. The CPIO & FAA have joined
hands to prevent exposure of deep rooted corruption and unholy nexus
between the counsels and Rajya Sabha officials.

He further submitted that the present RTI Application is based on a judgment
passed by the High Court of Delhi, details of which were mentioned in the RTI
Application. Furthermore, he pointed out that a bare perusal of the judgment
reveals that the Rajya Sabha officials have misused their administrative
powers, squandered public money on avoidable litigation and caused hardship
& harassment to the defendant employee. The High Court has imposed a cost
of Rs.1,00,000/- to be paid in the manner, as directed by the Court.
He further argued that the judgment of the High Court is in public domain &
freely available on the website of the High Court. The contents of the judgment
are undisputed. Thus the citizens of the country are entitled to call for records
to ensure compliance of the judgment in its true letter in spirit. The same
merits disclosure in larger public interest.

                                       3


 He further relied on a judgment in Public Information Officer Vs State
Information Commission (Writ Petition No. 3262(MB) of 2008), where the
Lucknow Bench of Allahabad High Court has held as follows:

      ".................The purpose and object of the Act is not only to provide
      information but to keep a check on corruption, and for that matter
      confers a right upon the citizens to have the necessary information, so
      that appropriate action may be initiated or taken against the erring
      officers and also against the arbitrary and illegal orders."
He requested in his prayer to direct the CPIO to provide complete & correct
information at the earliest; also to invoke subsection 1 & 2 of 
Sec.20
 of the Act
against the CPIO for refusing complete information without any justified
reasons; also to invoke subsections 1 & 2 of 
Sec.20
 against the FAA for passing
illegal orders in breach of principles of natural justice, for invoking inapplicable
clauses with an intention to hide corruption and opaque functioning. He
requested to decide the Appeal under 
Sec.19 (5)
 of the Act. He further
requested to direct the CPIO to disclose the RTI Application & its disposal on
the official website of the Secretariat, in terms of DOPT guidelines.
The CPIO vide written submissions dated 22.12.2022 submitted that the RTI
application received from the appellant was sent by RTI Cell to Personnel
Section, Estt.(G) Section and Vigilance Section for assistance. The information
received from the Estt (G) Section and Vigilance Section. Estt.(G) Section had
also asked for the cost of information (8 pages). Accordingly, the appellant was
informed and payment link was created on RTI-MIS portal. On receipt of the
payment, the information to the extent available was forwarded to the
appellant vide the then CPIO's letter in hard form and online through RTI-MIS
portal both dated 02.09.2021.

However, information furnished to the applicant at the application/ first
appeal stage has been compiled point-wise as under:

In respect of point no. 1, Name of the Counsel(s) was informed and with regard
to counsel fees incurred, the appellant was informed that the compilation of
information would disproportionately divert the resources of the public
authority. Thus the same was denied
 u/s 7(9)
 of the RTI Act.
In respect of point no. 2 information was provided in one page on payment
basis. In respect of point no. 3 the name and designation of the official was
informed. In respect of point no. 3 the copy of the file notings were provided

                                         4

 on payment basis (7 pages). In respect of points no. 4 and 5 the CPIO informed
the appellant that no such information is available in the Secretariat.
The CPIO further submitted that the concerned Sections have reiterated their
replies furnished at the application and first appeal stage. He further submitted
that point-wise information to the extent available was provided to the
appellant after receiving the cost of information.

Observations:

At the outset it was relevant to examine the subject matter relating to RSA
106/2017 decided by the Delhi High Court, it was noted that in the above case,
the applicant was not a party. Moreover, the information sought as available
was given by the CPIO vide letter dated 02.09.2021. Be that as it may, as the
fee paid to the Advocate(s) was asked, it is pertinent to mention here that the
same is personal information of the parties. It is not disputed that the fees
were paid from public exchequer, however, unless larger public interest is
demonstrated the information sought cannot be disclosed. The appellant's
plea that the citizens of the country are entitled to call for records to ensure
compliance of the judgment in its true letter in spirit and the same merits
disclosure in larger public interest seems to be a feeble argument.
Be that as it may, Sec 7(9) was not correctly invoked, the information if
available in any form also cannot be disclosed being related to third parties. 
It
is also pertinent to mention here that the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
SLP(C) No. 27734 of 2012 titled as 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande v. Central
Information Commission
 & ors., had held as under:-


      "14. The details disclosed by a person in his income tax returns are
      "personal information" which stand exempted from disclosure under
      clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, unless involves a larger public
      interest and the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public
      Information Officer or the Appellate Authority is satisfied that the larger
      public interest justifies the disclosure of such information."

The fees paid to Advocate shall reveal the personal income details of the
Advocate. It was also noted that the Delhi High Court in the case of 
Naresh
Trehan vs. Rakesh Kumar Gupta and Ors.
( 2015) 216 DLT 156 had held as
follows:


      "20. It has been contended by the petitioners that the expression
      "personal information" must also extend to information relating to

                                       5

       corporate entities. Inasmuch as they may also fall within the definition of
      expression "person" under the 
General Clauses Act, 1897
 as well as under

      the 
Income Tax Act, 1961
. However, I am unable to accept this
      contention for the reason that the expression "personal information" as
      used in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the Act has to be read in the context
      of information relating to an individual. A plain reading of the aforesaid
      clause would indicate that the expression "personal information" is
      linked with "invasion of privacy of the individual". The use of the word
      "the" before the word "individual" immediately links the same with the
      expression "personal information"

The CPIO failed to appreciate the fact that information relating to fees paid to
an Advocate or Advocate(s) is personal to them and not disclosable under the

RTI Act
.

The appellant's reliance on the decision dated 11.07.2017 of the earlier bench
of CIC in case no. CIC/NIACL/A/2016/305580 was examined and it was noted
that 
in that case
 the following direction was issued:

      "Keeping in view the facts of the case and submission made by both the
      parties, the Commission observed that the information sought by the
      Appellant pertained to the implementation of the order of NCDRC which
      was sought in the public interest and therefore the Commission directs
      the Chairman, The New India Assurance Co. Ltd to depute an officer of a
      suitable seniority to conduct a detailed enquiry into the matter and fix
      responsibility and accountability besides providing information to the
      Appellant, within a period of 30 days from the date of receipt of this
      order under intimation to the Commission."

The above order was issued in respect of RTI application dated 06.04.2016 filed
by the appellant asking for information relating implementation of the order of
NCDRC. All the points of the RTI application were examined and nowhere in
that application had details of Legal fee paid sought. Therefore
, 
the above case

is not relevant in this case.


In case no. CIC/BKOBD/A/2017/161908 the coordinate bench of the
Commission on 14.03.2019 held as under:



 
"6.1. There have been plethora of cases wherein the Supreme Court has
      imposed exemplary cost (
Shiv Sagar Tiwari Vs Union of India & Ors.
 and
      
Lucknow Development Authority Vs M.K. Gupta
) with the directions that

                                       6

      the same may be recovered from the person who has thrusted litigation
     upon the public authority and caused burden on the public exchequer.




     6.2. The grounds taken by the CPIO as well as the FAA are perfunctory.
     The information relating to the court case is already available in the
     public domain to bring accountability and transparency. Hence, the
     information called for may be provided to the appellant as there is no
     invasion of privacy in this case within ten days from date of receipt of
     this order.



     6.3. The Commission takes serious note of the absence of the CPIO, Bank
     of Baroda, and cautions him/her to attend the second appeal hearings
     and discharge their duties during adjudication of the matter. With the
     above observations and directions, the appeal is disposed of."



In 
the above case
, the respondent was not present.
 
Moreover, this bench is
relying on the 
ratio 
laid down in
 the case of 
CPIO ... vs Subhash Chandra
Agarwal
 on 13 November, 2019 by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, wherein it was
held as under:




     "36. If one's right to know is absolute, then the same may invade another's
     right to privacy and breach confidentiality, and, therefore, the former right has
     to be harmonised with the need for personal privacy, confidentiality of
     information and effective governance. 
The RTI Act
 captures this interplay of
     the competing rights under clause (j) to 
Section 8(1)
 and 
Section 11
. While
     clause (j) to 
Section 8(1)
 refers to personal information as distinct from
     information relating to public activity or interest and seeks to exempt
     disclosure of such information, as well as such information which, if disclosed,
     would cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of an individual, unless public
     interest warrants its disclosure, 
Section 11
 exempts the disclosure of
     'information or record...which relates to or has been supplied by a third party
     and has been treated as confidential by that third party'. By differently
     wording and indicting the challenge that privacy and confidentiality throw to
     information rights, the 
RTI Act
 also recognises the interconnectedness, yet
     distinctiveness between the breach of confidentiality and invasion of privacy,
     as the former is broader than the latter, as will be noticed below.



                                         7


       59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion, would indicate
      that personal records, including name, address, physical, mental and
      psychological status, marks obtained, grades and answer sheets, are all
      treated as personal information. Similarly, professional records, including
      qualification, performance, evaluation reports, ACRs, disciplinary proceedings,
      etc. are all personal information. Medical records, treatment, choice of
      medicine, list of hospitals and doctors visited, findings recorded, including that
      of the family members, information relating to assets, liabilities, income tax
      returns, details of investments, lending and borrowing, etc. are personal
      information. Such personal information is entitled to protection from
      unwarranted invasion of privacy and conditional access is available when
      stipulation of larger public interest is satisfied. This list is indicative and not
      exhaustive.



As far as the plea that the FAA failed to provide hearing to the applicant is
concerned, the appellant had specifically requested for the same in his first
appeal. The FAA failed to provide a hearing to the appellant and the same was
clearly a violation of the principles of natural justice. Be that as it may, at this
stage, considering the appellant's second appeal on merits was felt imperative.



It was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
Manohar Vs. State
of Maharashtra
, in Civil Appeal No.9095/2012 as follows:


      "Thus, the principle is clear and settled that right of hearing, even if not
      provided under a specific statute, the principles of natural justice shall so
      demand, unless by specific law, it is excluded. It is more so when exercise
      of authority is likely to vest the person with consequences of civil nature."



Decision:



It is also brought to the notice of the FAA that although the 
Right
to Information Act
 or the rules made thereunder do not prescribe in detail the
procedure to be followed by the Appellate Authority in dealing with first
appeals, by convention, the Appellate Authority should give an opportunity of
hearing to any Appellant if the Appellant expressly wants to be heard.
Therefore, the Commission would like the Appellate Authority to bear this in
mind and, whenever any such request is made, to afford an opportunity of
hearing to the Appellant. The present CPIO is directed to serve a copy of this
order to the concerned FAA for his information.



                                           8


 As far as the relief sought in respect of the information relating to Advocate
fee is concerned, the same stands exempted
 u/s 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act. The rest
of the information sought was already provided as per the written submissions
of the CPIO dated 22.12.2022.

            The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                           Vanaja N. Sarna (वनजा एन. सरना)
                                    Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु!त)
Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत          त)


A.K. Assija (ऐ.के. असीजा)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011- 26182594 /
 दनांक / Date





                                      9