[Cites 
33
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Rajinder Kumar vs Director General Of Income Tax (Inv.) ... on 2 November, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                            बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/ DGITD/A/2023/638081

Rajinder Kumar                                          ......अपीलकता /Appellant


                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम

CPIO,
Director General of Income Tax,
Room No 2005 20th Floor
E2 Block Civic Centre, JLN Marg
New Delhi-110002.                                  .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                   :   30/10/2023
Date of Decision                  :   30/10/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on          :   19/08/2022
CPIO replied on                   :   27/04/2023
First appeal filed on             :   22/05/2023
First Appellate Authority order   :   07/07/2023
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated        :   04/08/2023

Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 19.08.2023 seeking the following
information:



                                        1


 "The Income-tax assessment of the undersigned Rajinder Kumar (PAN -
AAAPK9260E) for the Assessment Year 2006-07 and 2007-08 was completed vide
order dated 27 February 2015 passed u/s 153A r.ws 143(3) of the 
Income-tax Act,
1961
. In the course of assessment, the period of limitation for completing the
assessment was extended by one year (as per Para 6 of the Assessment Order for
AY 2006-07 and Para 7 of the Assessment Order for AY 2007-08) citing provisions
of 
section 153B(1)(viii)
 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 on the basis that some
information was sought from the foreign authorities and that the said information
had not been received at the time of passing the assessment order.



Based on the assessment order, it is understood that the reference for exchange of
information under an agreement referred in 
section 90
 of the Income-tax Act,
1961 was made by the Assistant Commissioner of Income-tax, Central Circle-30,
New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as Ld. AO) through FT&TR division of the CBDT.
In relation to this, please provide me the following information/documents:



      (a) Copy of reference made by the Ld. AO to the FT&TR division of the CBDT
      to seek information in relation to the undersigned Assesses from a foreign
      authority be provided.



      (b) Whether as per the records available with the Ld. AO any reference in
      relation to the undersigned assesses was made to any foreign authority in
      terms of an agreement referred in 
section 90
 of the Income-tax Act, 1961?



      (c) If the answer to the (b) is in affirmative, the date of making such
      reference and the documents in terms of which such reference was made
      may be provided.



      (d) If the answer to the (b) is in affirmative, whether any response (including
      denial to share the information) was received from the foreign authority
      and if so, the date of receipt of response and copy of response may be
      provided."



The CPIO furnished a reply to the appellant on 27.04.2023 stating as under:



                                         2


       "The information sought by the applicant is confidential in nature and the
      same is related to information received from foreign government is
      confidential. Hence, the same is exempted
 u/s 8(1)(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 22.05.2023. FAA's order
dated 07.07.2023 held as under:



      "Aggrieved the applicant preferred to file an appeal before this office. In the
case of applicant assesses, search & seizure action
 u/s 132
 of the Act was made.
During the investigation, the applicant has voluntarily admitted of having an
account with HSBC Bank and submitted that the bank account was opened in 1991
and closed in 2006. Further the applicant has offered the undisclosed income as
income from other sources with respect to bank accounts in HSBC Switzerland
while filing the ITR in response to the notice
 u/s 153A
 of the Act, however, the
same was not disclosed while filing original Income Tax Return.



      As the applicant has not submitted the full bank statement starting from
day of opening the account in HSBC, Geneva, Switzerland till date of closing the
bank account, hence, the request letter to refer to provide requested information
was issued.



      Accordingly, reference was made to FT&TR division with a request that
Switzerland Tax be requested to provide required information as per the
agreement with Government. The reference made to foreign country and
information obtained from try, if any is a secret document which is confidential in
nature. Further perusal of the assessment order, it was clearly mentioned that no
information We received from the concerned authority. The relevant portion of
para 6 is reproduced below:



      "The requisite information from the concerned authorities has not been
      received so far."



       From the above fact, it is evident that no information was received from
foreign authority and the case of the assesses was completed based on material
available on record only. This clearly depicts that the claim of the applicant that
the reference made, and information received is critical evidence is found incorrect
as no addition was made by the Assessing Officer based on information received
from foreign authority as the same was not received.



                                         3


       Further, the prosecution was also launched against the assesses, the same
is pending with Court. If the information required is necessary for Hon'ble ITAT
proceedings, the same may be asked through Sr. Departmental Representative by
the Hon'ble Court."



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the denial of information by the CPIO
under 
Section 8(1)(f)
 of RTI Act, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Represented by Advocate Karanjot Singh along with Akur Kishanpuria,
C.A. and R. Hotwani present in person.



Respondent: Dr Vasagiri Shilpa, DCIT- (61(1)) & CPIO along with Yogesh Nayyar,
FAA present in person.



The Advocate for the Appellant invited attention of the bench towards the
contents of instant Appeal, relevant extracts of which are reproduced below in
verbatim -



"....Ground No. 1: The Impugned FAA Order is arbitrary, erroneous and unjustified
as it has over-reached the scope of 
section 8(1)(f)
 of the RTI Act and classified the
information sought by the Appellant as "confidential", without giving any reason
or supporting documentary evidence:



2. Vide the Impugned FAA Order, the RTI First Appeal was rejected stating that: "The
reference made to foreign country and information obtained from foreign country, if
any is a secret document which is confidential in nature. "



3. Your kind attention is invited to 
section 8
 of the RTI Act which lists out certain
specific instances in which information requested for by a citizen is exempted from
being provided/disclosed. 
Section 8(1)(f)
 of the RTI Act specifically exempts
"information received in confidence from foreign Government" from being disclosed
to a citizen. 
Section 8(1)(f)
 is extracted below for ease of reference:
"8. Exemption from disclosure of information.--(]) Notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act, there shall be no obligation to give any citizen,--
 [...] (f) information received in confidence from foreign Government;"

(Emphasis supplied)


                                         4


 4. As is evident from the plain reading of 
section 8(1)(f)
, the following two criteria
need to be jointly satisfied before any information can be said to be exempt from
disclosure under this provision:

 The information should have been received from the foreign government; and
 The information should have been received in confidence.



5. It is humbly submitted that 
section 8(1)(f)
 does not exempt from disclosure:



 information which is not received from the foreign government; or information
which is received from foreign government without any attached confidentiality
condition; or

6. It is humbly submitted that the Impugned FAA Order has erroneously over-reached
the scope of 
section 8(1)(f)
 of the RTI Act due to the following reasons:



(i) All the information which was sought was not received from the foreign
government -

It is to be noted that the information sought by the Appellant in the Application
 u/s 6

of the RTI Act is multi-faceted and not all of it can be considered as being received
from the foreign Government and that too with some attached confidentiality
condition.



The Appellant has, inter alia, sought a copy of reference made by the Ld. AO to the
FT&TR division of the CBDT in relation to the Appellant's matter, the date of
reference made to foreign authority, the date of receipt of response, if any, from the
foreign authority etc. These items of information, cannot be considered to have been
received from any foreign government, are thus outside the exemption from
disclosure provided by 
section 8(1)(f)
 of the RTI Act. Accordingly, it is humbly
submitted that the provisions of 
section 8(1)(f)
 of the RTI Act do not apply, and the
information ought to have been shared with the Appellant.



(ii) Confidential information received from foreign government is permitted to be
disclosed to the assessee under India-Switzerland DTAA. As per 
Article 26(2)
 of the
India-Swiss DTAA, any secret information in relation to the Appellant received by
India under the said DTAA is permitted to be disclosed to persons or authorities
concerned with the tax assessment, prosecution etc. Thus, the Appellant being one of
the persons concerned with the assessment, is permitted access to such information
received from foreign authorities under the aforesaid DTAA.



Thus, if it is assumed that the information, if any, received from foreign authorities in
the Appellant's case has been received in confidence, the same is expressly permitted
to be disclosed to the Appellant under 
Article 26(2)
 of the India-Swiss DTAA. Thus,
such information cannot be withheld from the Appellant by solely relying upon

                                           5


section 8(1)(f)
 of the RTI Act, by erroneously overriding the express provisions of the
India-

Swiss DTAA. Detailed submissions of the Appellant in this regard are given
subsequently under Ground 3 of this appeal.

7. In view of the above, Impugned FAA Order should be quashed and information
sought by the Appellant be provided.



Ground No. 2: The Impugned FAA Order is arbitrary, erroneous and unjustified as it
passed mechanically without proper application of mind:

8. It is humbly submitted that the FAA has thus, not examined the nature of individual
items of information sought for by the Appellant, with due and proper application of
mind. The FAA has mechanically and without applying its mind, rejected the RTI First
Appeal.



 
xxx

 
Shri Dhananjay Tripathi v. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi (Pages
 1 to 4 of
the Case Law Compilation) - In this matter, the registrar of Banaras Hindu University
("BHU") had denied certain information to the appellant by simply of the 
RTI Act

without giving reasons for rejection as required
 u/s 7(8)(i)
 of the RTI Act. The CIC
while directing the Registrar, BHU, to make available a copy of the information to the
appellant, observed that: "Through this Order the Commission now wants to send the
message loud and clear that quoting provisions of 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act ad libitum
to deny the information requested for, by CPIOs/Appellate Authorities without giving
any justification or grounds as to how these provisions are applicable is simply
unacceptable and clearly amounts to malafide denial of legitimate information
attracting penalties under 
section 20(1)
 of the Act."




Appeal No. CIC/OK/A/2006/00163 dated 07 July 2006.



Section 8(1)(g)
 exempts from disclosure "information, the disclosure of which would
endanger the life or physical safety of any person or identify the source of
information or assistance given in confidence for law enforcement or security
purposes;"



3 
Section 8(1)(h)
 exempts from disclosure "information which would impede the
process of investigation or apprehension or prosecution of offenders;" Arun Kumar
Goel v. Public Information Officer Under RTI (Pages 5 to 28 of the Case Law
Compilation) - In this case, the appellant had sought for copies of all lease
deeds/lease agreements signed by the Consulate General of India, Sydney between
2010 and 2016. The PIO denied the information to him by citing relevant of the 
RTI
Act
. The Central Information Commission ("CIC") observed that the respondents

                                          6

 merely cited the relevant provisions of 
RTI Act
 but failed to give any valid justification
about applicability of the above exemption in this case.



Accordingly, the CIC ruled in the favour of the appellant 
Shri R.K. Jain v. Department
of Revenue (Pages
 29 to 30 of the Case Law Compilation) - In this case, the CIC
observed that:


"6. It is pertinent to mention that both the CPIO and the AA passed the impugned
orders in their quasi-judicial capacity as distinguished from their administrative
capacity. Both the authorities are mandated to apply their mind while taking a
decision. They are not expected to pass mechanical orders."



 In Office Memorandum No.10/23/2007-IR dated 09.07.2009 (Pages 31 to 34 of the
Case Law Compilation) issued by the Department of Personnel and Training (Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions) bearing the subject 'Disposal of first
appeals under the 
RTI Act, 2005
', while elaborating on certain duties and
responsibilities of the first appellate authorities under the 
RTI Act
, it is stated that:

"3. Deciding appeals under the 
RTI Act
 is a quasi-judicial function. It is, therefore,
necessary that the appellate authority should see to it that the justice is not only
done but it should also appear to have been done. In order to do so, the order passed
by the appellate authority should be a speaking order giving justification for the
decision arrived at."



9. Therefore, by placing reliance upon the above the aforesaid case laws and Office
Memorandum dated 09.07.2009 a Impugned FAA Order being arbitrary, erroneous,
unjustified and violative of the 
RTI Act
 is liable to set aside.



Ground No. 3: The Impugned FAA Order is arbitrary, erroneous and unjustified
since it has denied disclosure of information sought by the Appellant in spite of
authorization under the India-Swiss Confederation Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement to disclose such information to the Appellant:



10. It is understood that the aforesaid reference in the Appellant's case was made to
the Swiss authorities (as mentioned in the Assessment Orders) for exchange of
information under the India-Swiss Confederation DTAA. In this regard, reference is
made to 
Article 26
 of the India-Swiss DTAA, which deals with "Exchange of
Information" and the relevant extract of the same is reproduced below for the ease of
reference:



"1. The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall exchange such
information as is foreseeably relevant for carrying out the provisions of this
Agreement or to the administration or enforcement of the domestic laws concerning


                                            7

 taxes covered by the Agreement in so far as the taxation thereunder is not contrary
to the Agreement [...]


2. Any information received under paragraph 1 by a Contracting State shall be
treated as secret in the same manner as information obtained under the domestic
laws of that State and shall be disclosed only to persons or authorities (including
courts and administrative bodies) concerned with the assessment or collection of the
enforcement or prosecution in respect of, or the determination of appeals in relation
to the taxes referred to in paragraph 1, or the oversight of the above. Such persons or
authorities shall use the information only for such purposes. They may disclose the
information in public court proceedings or in judicial decisions ..."(Emphasis supplied)

11. As evident from 
Article 26(2)
 of the DTAA, the information, if any, provided by the
Swiss Authorities to the Income-tax Department in the Appellant's case is permitted
to be disclosed to persons who are concerned with the specified assessment or
prosecution or determination of appeals and who, inter alia, include the Appellant.
Reference in this regard is made to Paragraph 12 of the OECD Model Commentary
2017 on 
Article 26-
 Exchange of Information which states that:



"Subject to paragraphs 12.3 and 12.4, the information obtained may be disclosed
only to persons and authorities involved in the assessment or collection of, the
enforcement or prosecution in respect of, the determination of appeals in relation to
the taxes with respect to which information may be exchanged according to the first
sentence of paragraph 1, or the oversight of the above. This means that the
information may also be communicated to the taxpayer, his proxy or to the
witnesses." (Emphasis supplied)

Thus, there is absolutely no bar on disclosing the aforesaid information to the
Appellant even under the applicable India-Swiss DTAA.



12. At this juncture, it may be noted that even in case any information in the
Appellant's case has been received from foreign authorities with an attached
confidentiality condition, the same is still permitted to be disclosed to the Appellant
under the India-Swiss DTAA. It is humbly submitted that the exemption
 u/s 8(1)(f)
 of
the RTI Act with respect to information received in confidence from foreign
authorities, cannot be read and imposed contrary to the intention and purpose of

Article 26
 of the applicable India-Swiss DTAA.



13. Thus, in absence of any bar, whatsoever, in the DTAA on providing to the
Appellant, information sourced by the Income-tax Department from Swiss authorities
under the 
IT Act
 and the India-Swiss DTAA, the Impugned FAA Order denying access
to the Appellant to information requested is liable to be set aside in as much as it is


                                          8

 completely arbitrary, unjustified and violative of the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and the
DTAA.



Ground No. 4: Without prejudice to the above, even if it is accepted that the
information received from the foreign authorities is with a condition of
confidentiality, it is humbly submitted that the Appellant could not have been
denied disclosure of the balance information sought by the Appellant:



14. Without prejudice to the above, even if it is accepted that information, if any, has
been received in confidence from the foreign authorities in the Appellant's case, it is
humbly submitted that as discussed above, 
section 8(1)(f)
 of the RTI Act only exempts
from disclosure the information which is received from a foreign Government and
that too with an attached confidentiality condition. 
Section 8(1)(f)
 does not exempt
from disclosure any and every other information which is outside the purview of the
exemption
 u/s 8(1)(f)
.

15. In this regard, your kind attention is also invited to 
section 10(1)
 of the RTI Act
which states that:

"(1) Where a request for access to information is rejected on the ground that it is in
relation to information which is exempt from disclosure, then, notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act, access may be provided to that part of the record
which does not contain any information which is exempt from disclosure under this
Act and which can reasonably be severed from any part that contains exempt
information." (Emphasis supplied). Thus, 
section 10(1)
 of the RTI Act permits
disclosure of that portion of the record which does not contain any exempt
information, provided that such portion is severable from the exempt information.



16. Reference in this regard can be placed upon the order of the CIC in 
Shri A.M.
Attar v. Ministry of External Affairs, Appeal No
: CIC/OK/A/2007/01305 (Pages 35 to
38 of the Case Law Compilation), wherein the appellant filed an RTI application
seeking details in relation to the India-Saudi Arabia Bilateral Agreement regarding
the travel of Haj pilgrims. The respondent public authority attempted to, inter alia,
deny disclosing the information relating to the Bilateral Agreement by relying on

section 8(1)(a)
 and 
8(1)(f)
 of the RTI Act.




The respondent argued that the disclosure of complete information pertaining to the
Bilateral Agreement could adversely impact India's foreign relations and diplomatic
relations among the various Muslim nations whose delegates travel to Haj
pilgrimage.

Further, it was contended that since the Bilateral Agreement was information
received in confidence from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, hence the disclosure of
such information is unwarranted. The CIC held that certain part of the Agreement
may at best be severed by applying 
section 10(1)
 of the RTI Act and directed for the

                                           9

 remaining information in the Bilateral Agreement which does not pertain to any
sensitive data to be provided to the appellant. The relevant portion of the CIC order is
extracted below for ease of reference:



"...only certain part of the Agreement may at best be severed applying provisions of

Section 10 (1)
 of the RTI Act 2005. In view of the arguments and apprehension
expressed by the Respondent about the damage to international relations, the part of
the Clause Two of the Agreement which specifies the quota of the Indian Hajis qua
the total population of the Muslims may be severed in order that no sensitive
information may be disclosed in public which may have detrimental impact on the
foreign relations between the various nations. Similarly the figures (data) depicting
the number of Hajis in the Clause Four of the Agreement may also be severed from
the information and exempted from disclosure. The remaining information in the
Bilateral Agreement does not pertain to any sensitive data, as agreed by the
Respondent also and the same should accordingly be provided to the Appellant
within the 20th January 2010."



17. In Arun Kumar Goel (supra) (Pages 5 to 28 of the Case Law Compilation), the
appellant had sought for copies of all lease deeds/lease agreements signed by the
Consulate General of India, Sydney between 2010 and 2016. The PIO denied the
information to him by citing 
section 8(1)(a)
 and 
section 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act. The PIO
also argued that Consulate General of India in Sydney must follow the privacy-law of
Australia while handling RTI Applications and that since copies of the lease deeds or
lease agreements signed by the CGI at Sydney are with Australian parties, providing
the same will violate the Privacy Act of 1988 of Australia. The CIC observed that:

A. the purpose of the 
RTI Act
 is to promote transparency and probity;



B. even if the contention raised by the PIO with regards to violation of Privacy Act of
1988 of Australia is conceded to, the blanket denial of providing information sought
by the appellant is incorrect;

6 
Section 8(1)(a)
 exempts from disclosure "information, disclosure of which would
prejudicially affect the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security, strategic,
scientific or economic interests of the State, relation with foreign State or lead to
incitement of an offence".

7 
Section 8(1)(d)
 exempts from disclosure "information including commercial
confidence, trade secrets or intellectual property, the disclosure of which would harm
the competitive position of a third party, unless the competent authority is satisfied
that larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such information;"



C. 
section 10
 of the RTI Act, 2005 was incorporated to tackle such complications. As
per 
section 10
, all such information which could create any sort of impediment could
be severed to provide the remaining information.

                                          10


 The CIC thus, directed the PIO to provide the copies of the lease deeds for the period
between 2013-16, free of cost. The CIC also directed that the PIO must redact/black
out the personal/private information, if any, as per 
section 10
 of the RTI Act and
provide information as permissible under the 
RTI Act
.



18. Reference in this regard can be made upon the case of 
Ferani Hotels Pvt. Ltd. v.
State Information Commissioner, Greater Mumbai & Others
 (Pages 39 to 52 of the
Case Law Compilation) wherein the appellant had claimed that the information
sought by the respondent was exempt from disclosure under, inter alia, 
section
8(1)(d)
, 
8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, on the facts of the case,
held that 
section 8(1)(d)
 and 
8(1)(j)
 are not applicable in any manner. Further, the
appellant had argued that only some part of the information sought could have been
disclosed to the respondent by virtue of 
section 10
 of the RTI Act. The Supreme Court
rejected this plea by observing that:




"32. 
Section 10
 of the RTI Act refers to severability i.e. information, which ought to be
disclosed and not to be disclosed can be severed. This in turn would require a
prerequisite that information sought contains some element which has been
protected under 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act. Having held that 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act has
no application, this plea is only stated to be rejected"



19. Out of all the information sought by the Appellant in the Application
 u/s 6
 of the
RTI Act, only the "copy of the response received from the foreign authority" pursuant
to the reference made to such authority under the DTAA can, arguendo, be said to
have been "information received in confidence from foreign government." Only this
response, if any, received from the foreign authority pursuant to a reference made
under the DTAA can be claimed to be a "secret document which is confidential in
nature." Thus, only this copy of the response, if any, received from the foreign
authority may be classifiable 
Section 8(1)(d)
 exempts from disclosure "information
including commercial confidence, trade secrets or intellectual property, the disclosure
of which would harm the competitive position of a third party, unless the competent
authority is satisfied that larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such
information". supporting documentary evidence to be produced by the Income-tax
Department) as being exempt from disclosure
 u/s 8(1)(f)
 of the RTI Act.

20. From the above, it follows that, out of all the information sought under
Application
 u/s 6
 of the RTI Act, the Appellant could not have been denied disclosure
of the following information ("Balance Information"), being reasonably severable
from the allegedly exempt response, if any, received from the foreign authorities:-

a. Copy of reference made by the Ld. AO to the FT&TR division of the CBDT seeking
information in relation to the undersigned Assessee from a foreign authority.
b. Whether as per the records available with the Ld. AO any other reference in

                                           11

 relation to the Appellant was made to any foreign authority in terms of an agreement
referred in 
section 90
 of the Income-tax Act, 1961?

c. If the answer to point (a) and/or (b) is in affirmative, the date of making such
reference and the documents in terms of which such reference was made may be
provided.

d. If the answer to point (a) and /or (b) is in affirmative, whether any response
(including denial to share the information) was received from the foreign authority
and if so, the date of receipt of response may be provided.

21. Thus, it is humbly reiterated the Appellant cannot be denied access to the
aforesaid Balance Information, because:

a. it cannot be considered as "information received in confidence" from the foreign
authorities;

b. it is not exempt from disclosure under any provision of the 
RTI Act
; and
c. it is reasonably severable from the "copy of the response received from the foreign
authority" (which is the only portion that may be contended to be exempt from
disclosure
 u/s 8(1)(f)
 of the RTI Act).

22. It is humbly submitted that the Balance Information sought for in the Application

u/s 6
 of the RTI Act is crucial to determine the validity of the Assessment Orders and
further taxability, if any, that may arise for AY 2006-07 and AY 2007-08 in the
Appellant's case.

                                           xxx

Ground No. 5: Without prejudice to the above, the Appellant should be provided
with the information regarding date on which reference was made to the foreign
authority in the Appellant's case and the date on which the response, if any, was
received from the foreign authority.



23. .... the Appellant should be provided the information regarding date on which
reference, if any, was made to the foreign authority in the Appellant's case and the
date on which the response, if any, was received against such reference from the
foreign authority. This information regarding these dates is essential for determining
the basic issue of whether the Assessment Orders were issued within time limitation
or not, which goes to the very root of the matter in the appeals before the ITAT.



24. The Appellant in his Application
 u/s 6
 of the RTI Act has sought information which
is only related to him and directly affects the income tax appeal proceedings going on
against him.



25. In the case of Arun Kumar Goel (supra) (Pages 5 to 28 of the Case Law
Compilation), the appellant had sought for copies of all lease deeds/lease
agreements signed by the Consulate General of India, Sydney between 2010 and
2016. The PIO denied the information to him by citing 
section 8(1)(a)
10
 and 
section

                                         12


8(1)(d)
11
 of the RTI Act. The PIO also argued that since there is a pending litigation
between both the parties, the information pertaining to the same can be held in
confidence. The appellant contended that the relevant lease deeds are sought to
substantiate his matter pending before the concerned 10 
Section 8(1)(a)
 exempts
from disclosure "information, disclosure of which would prejudicially affect the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security, strategic, scientific or economic
interests of the State, relation with foreign State or lead to incitement of an offence".



11 
Section 8(1)(d)
 exempts from disclosure "information including commercial
confidence, trade secrets or intellectual property, the disclosure of which would harm
the competitive position of a third party, unless the competent authority is satisfied
that larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such information;" court and
that disclosure of information may facilitate the exercise of this right. The CIC
rejected the arguments raised by the PIO for complete denial of the information and
held that the "blanket denial of such information which is vital for the appellant to
substantiate his defence in the court of law would be a sheer violation of the Principle
of Natural Justice." The CIC thus, directed the PIO to provide the copies of the lease
deeds for the period between 2013-16, free of cost, with the portions containing
personal/private information redacted/blacked out.



26. Thus, the Appellant should be provided with the information regarding date on
which reference was made to the foreign authority in the Appellant's case and the
date on which the response, if any, was received from the foreign authority as the
denial of the same would cause a grave and adverse effect on the Appellant's
defence before the ITAT and would amount to violation of principles of natural
justice.



27. Without prejudice to the above, a reference may be made to the Impugned FAA
Order wherein the FAA has stated that as per the assessment order dated 27.02.2015
issued in the Appellant's case for AY 2006-07 no information was received from
foreign authority and consequently the FAA observed that such information, if any,
received is not critical evidence. It is humbly submitted that even in case such
information was not actually received in the Appellant's case, your Honour is humbly
requested to provide the date of denial of this information. This date of denial is also
essential for determining the basic issue of whether the Assessment Orders were
issued within time limitation or not, which goes to the very root of the matter in the
appeals before the ITAT.



Ground No. 6: The Impugned FAA Order is arbitrary, erroneous and unjustified
since it was passed without providing any opportunity of being heard to the
Appellant.



                                           13


 28. It is humbly submitted that the FAA did not provide any opportunity of hearing to
the Appellant before issuing the Impugned FAA Order, thus failing in discharging its
duty as a quasi-judicial authority and thereby violating the principles of nature justice
and rendering the Impugned FAA Order erroneous, unjustified, arbitrary and liable to
be set aside.



29. It is humbly submitted that the FAA while deciding upon an appeal
 u/s 19(1)
 of
the RTI Act performs a quasi-judicial function and hence acts as a quasi-judicial
authority. This submissions is supported by the following judicial decisions, which
explain the term "quasi-judicial":



i. 
State of H.P. v. Raja Mahendra Pal12 (Pages
 53 to 71 of the Case Law Compilation)


- The Supreme Court defined a quasi-judicial function as being one which stands
midway a judicial and an administrative function. The relevant extract of the decision
is as follows:



"[...] Quasi-judicial acts are such acts which mandate an officer the duty of looking
into certain facts not in a way which it specially directs but after a discretion, in its
nature judicial. The exercise of power by such tribunal or authority contemplates the
adjudication of rival claims of the persons by an act of the mind or judgment upon
the proposed course of official action as to an object of the corporate power, for the
consequences of which the official will not be liable, although his act was no well
judged. A quasi-judicial function has been termed to be on which stands midway a
judicial and an administrative function. The primary test is as to whether the
authority alleged to be a quasi-judicial one, has any express statutory duty to act
judicially in arriving at the decision in question. If the reply is in the affirmative, the
authority would be deemed to be quasi-judicial, and if the reply is in the negative, it
would not be. The dictionary meaning of the word "quasi" is "not-exactly."



9. It follows, therefore, that an authority is described as quasi-judicial when it has
some of the attributes or trappings of judicial functions, but not all." (Emphasis
supplied)

ii. In the case of 
Indian National Congress v. Institute of Social Welfare13 (Pages
 72 to
92 of the Case Law Compilation), the Hon'ble Supreme Court laid down the principles
to determine when an act of a statutory authority would be a quasi-judicial act, in the
following words:


"24. The legal principles laying down when an act of a statutory authority would be a
quasi-judicial act, which emerge from the aforestated decisions are these:

Where (a) a statutory authority empowered under a statute to do any act (b) which
would prejudicially affect the subject (c) although there is no lis or two contending
parties and the contest is between the authority and the subject and (d) the statutory

                                            14

 authority is required to act judicially under the statute, the decision of the said
authority is quasi-judicial.



25. Applying the aforesaid principles, we are of the view that the presence of a lis or
contest between the contending parties before a statutory authority, in the absence
of any other attributes of a quasi-judicial authority is sufficient to hold that such a
statutory authority is quasi-judicial authority. However, in the absence of a lis before
a statutory authority, the authority would be quasi-judicial authority if it is required
to act judicially. [...]


27. What distinguishes an administrative act from a quasi-judicial act is, in the case
of quasi-judicial functions under the relevant law the statutory authority is required
to act judicially. In other words, where law requires that an authority before arriving
at a decision must make an enquiry, such a requirement of law makes the authority a
quasi-judicial authority.



[...] 29. [...] another test which distinguishes administrative function from quasi-
judicial function is, the authority who act quasi-judicially is required to act according
to the rules, whereas the authority which acts administratively is dictated by the
policy and expediency." [Emphasis supplied]

iii. 
In the case of 
Board of High School and Intermediate Education, U.P. v.
Ghanshyam Das Gupta14 (Pages
 93 to 101 of the Case Law Compilation) the
Examinations Committee cancelled the results of an examination for two students,
without affording an opportunity of hearing to them. The Supreme Court dealt with
the question whether the Examinations Committee was supposed to act as a quasi-
judicial body while exercising its powers of cancelling examination results. In this
case, there were no express provisions or procedure in the relevant statute which
imposed a duty on the Examinations Committee to act judicially by calling for an
explanation from or giving a hearing to the concerned examinees. However, the
Supreme Court noted that on an examination of the circumstances, it is evident that
while coming to a decision to punish examinees, the Committee has to consider,
judge and depend on the materials placed before it. Also, given the serious
consequences which an adverse decision of the Examinations Committee will have on
the students, the Supreme Court held that the Committee must be held to act
judicially in such circumstances. Consequently, the Court noted that once such a body
is acting quasi-judicially, principles of natural justice will apply to it and the examinee
against whom the Committee is proceeding should be heard. The relevant extract of
the decision is given below:




"Though therefore there is nothing express one way or the other in the Act or the
Regulations casting a duty on the Committee to act judicially, the manner of the

                                            15

 disposal, based as it must be on materials placed before it, and the serious effects of
the decision of the Committee on the examinee concerned, must lead to the
conclusion that a duty is cast on the Committee to act judicially in this matter
particularly as it has to decide objectively certain facts which may seriously affect the
rights and careers of examinees, before it can take any action in the exercise of its
power under Rule 1(1). We are therefore of opinion that the Committee when it
exercises its powers under Rule 1(1) is acting quasi-judicially and the principles of
natural justice which require that the other party, (namely, the examinee in this case)
must be heard, will apply to the proceedings before the Committee."



30. Further, supporting reference in this regard can again be placed upon the Office
Memorandum No. 10/23/2007-IR dated 09.07.2009 (Pages 31 to 34 of the Case Law
Compilation) issued by the Department of Personnel and Training (Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Government of India) bearing the subject
'Disposals of first appeals under the 
RTI Act, 2005
'. This Office Memo mentions that
the CIC has highlighted that in some cases the Appellate Authorities don't examine
the appeals judiciously and express their agreement with the decision of the Central
Public Information Officer mechanically. With respect to this the Office Memo further
goes on to observe that:



"3. Deciding appeals under the 
RTI Act
 is a quasi-judicial function. It is, therefore,
necessary that the appellate authority should see to it that the justice is not only
done but it should also appear to have been done. In order to do so, the order passed
by the appellate authority should be a speaking order giving justification for the
decision arrived at." (Emphasis supplied)


31. Thus, placing reliance upon above judgments and the aforesaid Office Memo, it
can be argued that the FAA, while disposing of the RTI First Appeal is performing a
quasi-judicial function and is thus a quasi-judicial authority, for the following reasons:

(a) The FAA is empowered under the 
RTI Act
 to decide on first appeals, including the
RTI First Appeal, filed under the 
RTI Act
;

(b) There is a lis or a contest between two parties, i.e. the Appellant and PIO in the
instant case;

(c) While deciding on the RTI First Appeal, the FAA is required to act judicially under
the 
RTI Act
, i.e. consider the facts and circumstances of the case and/or conduct an
enquiry to determine what information can be provided to the Appellant;

(d) The act of the FAA of deciding on the RTI First Appeal would prejudicially affect
the Appellant and his rights and any adverse order passed by the FAA will entail
serious consequences for the Appellant (for e.g. in the instant case, adverse order
passed by the FAA will seriously jeopardise the Appellant's chances of substantiating
his case before the ITAT).



                                           16


 32. Once it is clear that the FAA is acting as a quasi-judicial authority while deciding
on first appeals filed under the 
RTI Act
, it follows that the rules of natural justice must
be observed in discharging such quasi-judicial function.



33. Reliance in this regard can be placed upon the case of 
Mr. R.K. Jain v. Department
of Legal Affairs, Government of India15 (Pages
 102 to 106 of the Case Law
Compilation).


In this case, the CIC dealt with a case where the appellant sought for certain
information under the 
RTI Act
 but the said request was denied by the PIO. The first
appellate authority under the 
RTI Act
 further rejected the appellant's first appeal.
Before the CIC, the appellant argued that despite his request, the first appellate
authority did not provide personal hearing to him. The respondent authority also
admitted that no hearing notice was sent to the appellant in this case. The CIC ruled
in favor of the appellant and observed that:



"14. Passing orders in first appeal without hearing or sending hearing notice is illegal
and will render the order invalid. The Commission sets aside the order of First
Appellate Authority for violating 
RTI Act
 and breach of natural justice by denying the
Appellant a chance of presenting his case and by raising entirely a new defence which
was never claimed." (Emphasis supplied)


34. The CIC in Shri Chayan Ghosh Chowdhury v. CPIO 16 (Pages 107 to 108 of the Case
Law Compilation) while deciding upon an appeal observed that:



"4. The Appellant also complained that the FAA did not give him a personal hearing
even though he requested for it in his first appeal. In this context, we would wish to
point out the consistent position taken by the Commission that the FAA should give a
personal hearing to those Appellants who request for it. This is also in keeping with
the principle of natural justice."



35. Useful reference in this regard may be made to the decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Manohar v. State of Maharashtra17 (Pages 109 to 127 of the Case
Law Compilation) wherein it was observed that:

"25. Thus, the principle is clear and settled that right of hearing, even if not provided
under a specific statute, the principles of natural justice shall so demand, unless by
specific law, it is excluded. It is more so when exercise of authority is likely to vest the
person with consequences of civil nature."

36. Further, the Allahabad High Court in Babu Ram Gupta v. N.M. Majumdar,
Entertainment Tax Officer, Sitapur18 (Pages 128 to 131 of the Case Law Compilation)
held that:



                                            17


 "8. When right of property or other substantial right of a person is affected by an
order, it is the duty of the authority making the order to give an opportunity to the
person affected. The rule of fair play, which is often called the rule of natural justice,
demands that the authority making the order should not condemn a man without
giving him the opportunity of being heard. This rule has been held to apply not only
to judicial and quasi-judicial orders but also to cases where some substantial right of
the person proceeded against is affected."



37. Thus, by placing reliance upon the above judgments, it is humbly submitted that
the FAA being a quasi-judicial authority while disposing of the RTI First Appeal within
the contours of the 
RTI Act
, was required to act judicially and afford an opportunity of
hearing to the Appellant. However, the FAA rejected the RTI First Appeal without
providing a hearing to the Appellant and without even issuing a hearing notice to
him. Thus, the Impugned FAA Order is arbitrary, erroneous and unjustified and is
liable to be set aside, in as much as the same is violative the principles of natural
justice. ..."



In response to Rep. of Appellant's contentions, the FAA submitted that it was
already informed to the Appellant that "During the investigation, the applicant
has voluntarily admitted of having an account with HSBC Bank and submitted that
the bank account was opened in 1991 and closed in 2006. Further the applicant
has offered the undisclosed income as income from other sources with respect to
bank accounts in HSBC Switzerland while filing the ITR in response to the notice

u/s 153A
 of the Act, however, the same was not disclosed while filing original
Income Tax Return. As the applicant has not submitted the full bank statement
starting from day of opening the account in HSBC, Geneva, Switzerland till date of
closing the bank account, hence, the request letter to refer to provide requested
information was issued. Accordingly, reference was made to FT&TR division with a
request that Switzerland Tax be requested to provide required information as per
the agreement with Government. The reference made to foreign country and
information obtained from try, if any is a secret document which is confidential in
nature. Further perusal of the assessment order, it was clearly mentioned that no
information We received from the concerned authority. "The requisite information
from the concerned authorities has not been received so far."
From the above fact, it is evident that no information was received from foreign
authority and the case of the assesses was completed based on material available
on record only. This clearly depicts that the claim of the applicant that the
reference made, and information received is critical evidence is found incorrect as
no addition was made by the Assessing Officer based on information received
from foreign authority as the same was not received. Further, the prosecution was

                                           18

 also launched against the assesses, the same is pending with Court. If the
information required is necessary for Hon'ble ITAT proceedings, the same may be
asked through Sr. Departmental Representative by the Hon'ble Court."
Decision:



The Commission based on a perusal of the facts on record observes at the outset
that the information sought for in the RTI Application particularly, para (b)
onwards is largely in the form of seeking clarifications and answers to
interrogative queries regarding action taken on the Appellant's complaint, and
the same does not conform to 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act. The Appellant shall
note that outstretching the interpretation of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act to include
deductions and inferences to be drawn by the CPIO is unwarranted as it casts
immense pressure on the CPIOs to ensure that they provide the correct
deduction/inference to avoid being subject to penal provisions under the 
RTI Act
.

      "2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--

       (f) "information" means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;.."

In this regard, the Appellant's attention is drawn towards a judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court on the scope and ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act in the
matter of CBSE vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors.[CIVIL APPEAL NO.6454 of
2011]wherein it was held as under:

 
"35. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some misconceptions about
the 
RTI Act
. 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and
existing.........A public authority is also not required to furnish information which
require drawing of inferences and/or making of assumptions. It is also not
required to provide `advice' or `opinion' to an applicant, nor required to obtain
and furnish any `opinion' or `advice' to an applicant. The reference to `opinion'
or `advice' in the definition of `information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers
to such material available in the records of the public authority. Many public
authorities have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and
opinion to the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused
with any obligation under the 
RTI Act
." (Emphasis Supplied)




                                         19

 Similarly, in the matter of 
Khanapuram Gandaiah vs Administrative Officer &Ors.
[SLP (CIVIL) NO.34868 OF
 2009], the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:




      "7....Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material which is
not before him; or any information he could have obtained under law.
Under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such information
which can be accessed by the "public authority" under any other law for the time
being in force. The answers sought by the petitioner in the application could not
have been with the public authority nor could he have had access to this
information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged to give any reasons as to
why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was before him...."

(Emphasis Supplied)

And, in the matter of 
Dr. Celsa Pinto, Ex-Officio Joint Secretary,(School
Education) vs. The Goa State Information Commission
 [2008 (110) Bom L R
1238], the Hon'ble Bombay High Court held as under:




      "..... In the first place, the Commission ought to have noticed that the Act
confers on the citizen the right to information. Information has been defined
by 
Section 2(f)
 as follows.



 
Section 2(f)
 -Information means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;

      The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the question why
which would be the same thing as asking the reason for a justification for a
particular thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot expect to
communicate to the citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not done
in the sense of a justification because the citizen makes a requisition about
information. Justifications are matter within the domain of adjudicating
authorities and cannot properly be classified as information." (Emphasis
Supplied

Having observed as above, the Commission is not going into the merits of the
applicability of the exemptions clause of 
Section 8(1)(f)
 of RTI Act as invoked by
the CPIO. However, as regards the limited scope of relief, if any, that were
pertinent for para (a) of the RTI Application, it is observed that the same has been


                                         20

 duly attended to by the FAA by intimating the factual position as regards the
request for information in keeping with the spirit of the 
RTI Act
.



            With the above observations, the appeal is disposed of.



                                                 Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                        हािन)
                                       Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )

Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                      21