[Cites 
17
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Priyam Mittal vs Reserve Bank Of India on 13 July, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबा गंगनाथ माग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                           नई  द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/RBIND/A/2022/634153

Ms. Priyam Mittal                                    ......अपीलकता /Appellant

                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम
CPIO                                                 .... ितवादीगण /Respondent
Department of Banking Supervision
Reserve Bank of India, World Trade Centre
Cuffe Parade, Colaba, Mumbai-400005

Date of Hearing                     :   27/06/2023
Date of Decision                    :   27/06/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :              Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on            :   13/03/2022
CPIO replied on                     :   08/04/2022
First appeal filed on               :   05/06/2022
First Appellate Authority order     :   17/06/2022
Second Appeal dated                 :   24/06/2022

Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 13.03.2022 seeking the following
information:



Inspection Reports/Risk Assessment Report made by RBI post completing the
inspection or any interim report available of following entities for last 3 years
available under 
BR Act
 or any other applicable Act/Rules etc:

   (a) Bajaj Finance Ltd (b) Bajaj Finserv Ltd

The CPIO furnished a reply to the appellant on 08.04.2022 stating as under:



                                          1


 
"As regards the Supervisory Letter / Inspection Report and Risk Assessment Report
for the years 2018-19 and 2019-20, we have issued a notice under 
Section 11(1)
 of
the RTI Act, 2005 to Bajaj Finance Ltd (copy attached). On receipt of reply from the
company, further communication will be made. As regards the Inspection Report
and Risk Assessment Report of Bajaj Finance Limited for the year 2020-21, it is
informed that the supervisory process/ action in the matter is not yet complete.
Disclosure of such information at this stage is considered premature in terms of
Para 77 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court Judgment dated December 16, 2015 in

'Reserve Bank of India vs. Jayantilal Mistry Case
' [2016 (3) SCC 525]. Hence the
information is exempt from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(a)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.
Further, it is informed that Bajaj Finserv Limited is not registered with RBI as an
NBFC."




Being dissatisfied, the Appellant filed a First Appeal dated 05.06.2022.



The FAA vide order dated 17.06.2022 had observed that "CPIO is advised to keep
the appellant informed of all the further stages connected with the procedures
specified in 
Section 11
 of the RTI Act, 2005 and dismissed the appeal accordingly."



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Appellant approached the Commission
with the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Shri Girish Mittal representative of the Appellant present through
Video-Conference.

Respondent: Ms. Sangeeta Sheoran, Manager and Ms. Honey, Legal Officer
present through Video-Conference.



The written submissions of the Appellant and the Respondent are taken on
record.



The Representative of the Appellant, during the hearing, reiterated the contents
of RTI application and instant appeal and submitted that the Respondent has
wrongly not provided information on the RTI application of the Appellant.



The Appellant further reiterated the written submissions, which states as under:
"The appellant has filed this second appeal before Hon'ble CIC, alleging that the
CPIO and the First Appellate Authority have ganged up against this appellant to
deny the information. in the second appeal, the appellant has contended that the


                                         2

 information denied is covered in the directions of the SC's judgment in the matter
of 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case. The appellant has also cited handful of CIC's decisions
and a judgment passed by the Kerala High Court. The appellant has requested CIC
to direct the CPIO to provide the information as desired, to initiate penal
proceedings against the PIO
 u/s 20(1)
 & 
20(2)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 and to pass
strictures against the First Appellate authority for not following the 
RTI Act
 in
letter and spirit. It is submitted that the CPIO had examined the queries raised by
the appellant in his RTI applications and had responded to the queries in
conformity with the provisions of the 
RTI Act
. The reply was provided by the CPIO
well within the stipulated time period. Therefore, the request made by the
appellant in the present appeal to initiate penal proceedings against CPIO under

sections 20(1)
 & 
20(2)
 of the RTI Act, is baseless and not tenable. It is also
submitted that the specific information sought for by the appellant is spread
across various files, and hence, culling out the information and compiling the same
in the form sought by the appellant will disproportionately divert the resources of
the Reserve Bank in an unreasonable way in terms of 
Section 7(9)
 of the RTI Act,
2005. Further, disclosure of certain information in the reports may be subject to
exemptions under 
sections 8
 and 
9
 of the RTI Act. Therefore, FAA has observed
that even if the CPIO is to allow the Appellant to inspect the records, the CPIO
would be required to peruse all the documents and sever/blackout the exempt
information beforehand.
 
At the same time, it is also incumbent upon the CPIO to
examine each point in the reports and consider whether the disclosure of
information would be premature in terms of para 77 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
judgement in 
Reserve Bank of India v. Jayantilal Mistry
, 2016 (3) SCC 525. This
would heavily encumber the resources of the public authority. Therefore, FAA has
considered it appropriate not to direct the CPIO to allow inspection of the files. 8.
It is submitted that 
Section 21
 of the RTI Act provides protection of action taken in
good faith. The CPIO has considered the application of the appellant within the
purview of the 
RTI Act
. There is no procedural lacuna or any mala- fide intention
on part of the CPIO in replying to the RTI application filed by the appellant and
hence, initiation of any penal proceedings against the CPIO is not warranted and
justified as sought by the appellant."




The Representative of the Appellant, w.r.t the denial under 
Section 7(9)
 of the RTI
Act, reiterated the contents of the written submissions, which states as under:
"The CIC in its order in 
Er. Sarbajit Roy v. Delhi Development Corporation

elucidated upon the scope of 
Section 7(9)
 of the RTI Act. It observed that 
Section
7(9)
 of the act does not authorise a public authority to deny information.
 
The CIC
in its order in 
M. Raja Manohar v. Ordinance Factory, Yedumailaram
 further
clarified the scope of powers under 
Section 7 (9)
 and held that the provision only
allows for the disclosure of the requested information in a form other than the one


                                         3

 asked for on account of the reasons given under the said provision. The CIC,
through its orders has time and again has reiterated that the denial of information
under the 
RTI Act
 can happen only under the provisions of 
Section 8(1)
 or 
Section 9

of the Act.
 The Madras High Court in its judgement in Public Information Officer,
Villupuram Dist., Central Co-op. Bank Ltd. and Ors. v. Tamil Nadu Information
Commission and Ors[i]. has held that reasons such as shortage of human
resources cannot be raised to whittle down the citizen's right to seek information".



The Respondent, during the hearing, reiterated the contents of their written
submissions, which states as under:

"The Appellant has preferred this Second Appeal before this Hon'ble CIC wherein
she has contended that the CPIO has denied information saying that supervisory
action has not been completed for the years 2019-20 & 2020-21 and that the FAA
has dismissed the first appeal without cogent reasons. She further contended that
the Hon'ble Supreme Court has taken comprehensive view in the case of
"Jayantilal Mistry & Girish Mittal" that the information related to inspection
reports cannot be denied. 7. It is submitted that Bajaj Finance Ltd. (BFL") has filed
Second Appeal (Diary No. 147751 of 2022) against the FAA order dated July 13,
2022 upholding the decision of CPIO to disclose the information sought by Ms
Priyam Mittal (RTI application RBIND/R/E/22/01428). The aforesaid appeal is
pending for adjudication. 8. It is submitted that Hon'ble Supreme Court has passed
an order dated February 17, 2023, in W.P.(C) No. 59 of 2023 filed by BFL, thereby
staying the order dated November 30, 2022, passed by the FAA, RBI in Appeal No.
RBIND/A/P/22/00417 filed by BFL. In the said FAA order, FAA upheld the decision
of CPIO to disclose the information sought (Supervisory Letters issued to BFL for
the FYS 2018 and 2019) to the RTI applicant Shri Girish Mittal (RTI application No.
RBIND/R/E/21/03992). 9. It is further submitted that 
Section 21
 of the RTI Act
provides protection of action taken in good faith. The CPIO has considered the
application of the appellant within the purview of the 
RTI Act
. There is no
procedural lapses or any malafide intention on the part of the CPIO in replying to
the appellant. In view of the above, It can be said that the CPIO has acted
reasonably and diligently."



Decision:

In the facts of the instant case, it is pertinent to note that a decision of a
coordinate bench of the Commission in the matter of various third-party banks vs.
RBI vide File No. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 covers a
detailed discussion inter alia on the same nature of information sought for from
the RBI and the reliance placed by RBI on the 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case. Suffice to say



                                         4

 that the issues raised in the instant case are encapsulated in that same discussion
of the coordinate bench in the following manner:




 
"39. A comprehensive view has to be taken on the objection filed by the
institutions. These objectives has to be deliberated and adjudicated in the light of

Jayantilal Mistry
's case and other judicial pronouncements relevant in such
matter, some of which have been referred by the Commission in the above parts
as well. The Commission while examining various objections realize that the Writ
Petitions filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is seeking directions of
the Supreme Court for non-disclosure of certain aspects of these audit/inspection
report and any such guidance in these Writ Petitions will have direct bearing and
provide further clarity to the CPIO/FAA in adjudicating various aspects of
disclosure/non-disclosure of reports or the information/data which are part of
these reports under the provisions of the 
RTI Act
.
 The Commission takes note that
all the cases/second appeals filed herein are based on interpretations of RBI Vs.
Jayantilal Mistry case and other relevant judicial pronouncements requesting for
full disclosure vis-à-vis with exemptions under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act for non-
disclosure of full or parts of these reports.

        40. In view of the above observations, the Commission is of the view that
the reports generated in the hands of regulatory public authority in discharge of
its statutory obligations are information under 
Section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act, as the
regulator and the regulated entities are not governed by fiduciary relationship.

The orders of the Commission to their effect has been upheld by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case and the position is unchanged even
today. Various objections filed by banks/financial institutions, to be examined,
analyzed and adjudicated upon, are related to various data and information
submitted to the Reserve Bank of India by these financial institutions explaining
their operations, commercial decisions, clients data etc. under statutory
obligations can be disclosed as such. There are apparently two set of such
information which have been shared by the institutions with the regulator under
statutory obligation. First is the information/data of clients relating to their
business/commercial operations, financial transactions, business and commercial
strategy which is shared by clients with financial institutions in full trust and
confidence and is held by them in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure
under the 
RTI Act
 in their hands. Second set is the information relating to business
strategy, decisions, transactions, other operational data etc. of financial
institutions have been bearing on their competitive position which also enjoys the
exemption from disclosure in their hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise,
under the 
RTI Act
. Some of such data, on case to case basis be sensitive enough for
protection of national interest. The Commission is of the view that the protection
of disclosure of information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of


                                         5

 financial institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in
good faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligation.
 
Various
observations of Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case also does not
indicate so and decision of the regulator to consider redacting such
data/information while disclosing the reports is aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts.


 
41. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of
the CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care
has to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making
reasoned order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and later
in the hands of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be required to
adjudicate such RTI applications in the light of the observations of the Commission
afresh. The Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various
objections filed by the Banks and Financial Institutions and submissions made by
applicant to reach the decision in favour or against redaction of various parts of
the report on case to case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case and other relevant judgments, some of
which have been referred in this order as well. Hence, with these observations the
orders passed by the CPIO and FAA in these matters are set aside and the cases
are being remanded to the CPIO for adjudication afresh. (Emphasis Supplied)


       42. It is amply clear that Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and
others tagged are admitted in Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein guidance and
direction has been sought on non-disclosure of certain type of information which
are essentially the part of the Annual Inspection Report/RAR, etc. These petitions
also seek protection of interim communication between regulator and the
regulated entity in the process of finalization of these reports or otherwise. It is
obvious that decision in these Writ Petitions will provide clarity and guidance to
the Public Authority on redaction/non-disclosure of a set of information inspite of
being part of these reports which are open to disclosure. At this stage, any
decision by the Public Authority will amount to pre-judging the issues pending
admitted Writ Petitions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Various banks,
financial institutions, respondent public authority and the RTI applicant have
already impleaded party and are presenting their arguments before the Apex
Court.

       43. Hence, any decision of redaction or disclosure of information, without
waiting for decision in the Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged may cause irrevocable damage against right of privacy and protection of
commercial interest. Hence, the respondent public authority if expedient may
wait for the outcome in Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged or seek clarification from the Hon'ble Court and accordingly decide these
RTI applications by following process as enumerated in the earlier paras by the


                                         6

 Commission in the interest of principles of natural justice. While disclosing the
information they should be cautious in taking a considerate view balancing right
to privacy, protection of national and commercial interest on one hand vis-à-vis
larger public interest. (Emphasis Supplied)

 
44. It is further observed that similar view has also been taken by the
Division Bench of the Commission in file bearing nos. CIC/VS/A/2013/001488 and
CIC/VS/A/2013/001805 dated 11.05.2017 wherein the Commission observed that
'Having considered the submissions of both the parties, the Commission observes
that since a similar issue is pending adjudication before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the matter of Central for 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. &Ors.
, it would be judicious to await the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court. However, on receipt of the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter, the appellant shall be at
liberty to file second appeal afresh, if he so desires. The instant appeals are
disposed of'."




The above decision is therefore applicable to the instant case and no separate line
of adjudication is warranted in the matter. The stipulations contained in File No.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 stands endorsed to the
Respondent CPIO with emphasis on para 41 & 43 supplied as above .



                      The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक

 दनांक /





                                        7