[Cites 
7
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Rajkumar Choudhary vs Maganese Ore (India) Ltd. on 9 June, 2020


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                              के ीय सूचना आयोग
                     Central Information Commission
                          बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                      Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                      नई िद ी, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं     ा / Second Appeal No. CIC/MOILL/A/2018/174677

 Shri Rajkumar Choudhary                                   ... अपीलकता/Appellant

                                     VERSUS
                                      बनाम

 The CPIO, MOIL Limited, MOIL                               ... ितवादी /Respondent
 Bhawan, Katol Road, Dsitrict
 Nagpur, Maharashtra.

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:

 RTI : 28.05.2018             FA    : 18.07.2018           SA       : 28.12.2018

 CPIO : 30.06.2018            FAO : 01.08.2018             Hearing : 02.06.2020

                                    ORDER



1.    The appellant filed an application under the 
Right to Information Act, 2005


(RTI Act
) before the Central Public Information Officer (CPIO), MOIL Limited,
MOIL Bhawan, Katol Road, Dsitrict Nagpur, Maharashtra. The appellant seeking
information is as under:-

      "Reason as to why the employees for the post of MCO-Grade-II Tapping were
      selected with the qualification of 7th/8th pass but the advertisement says to
      select the candidates with qualification of matriculation pass".

2.    As the CPIO had not provided the requested information, the appellant filed
the first appeal dated 18.07.2018 requesting that the information should be provided
to him. The first appellate authority was ordered on 01.08.2018 and disposed of his

                                                                           Page 1 of 6

 first appeal. He filed a second appeal u/
Section 19(3)
 of the RTI Act before the
Commission on the ground that information has not been provided to him and
requested the Commission to direct the respondent to provide complete and correct
information.



Hearing:

3.    The appellant attended the hearing through audio-call. The respondent, Ms.
Preeti Joshi, Dy. General Manager (Legal) & CPIO attended the hearing through
audio-call.

4.    The appellant submitted that no information has been provided to him by the
respondent on his RTI application dated 28.05.2018. The appellant requested the
Commission that complete information should be provided to him.

5.    The respondent submitted that vide their letter dated 30.06.2018, they have
informed the appellant that he has sought similar information in his earlier RTI
applications, which has been replied to within stipulated period of time. The
respondent reiterated the replies given by the CPIO and FAA.



Decision:

6.    The Commission, after hearing the submissions of both the parties and after
perusal of records, observes that the query of the appellant amounts to
interpretation/clarification of the information, as he has sought reasons that as to
why some employees of lesser educational qualification was selected, etc. and the
CPIO is not supposed to create information; or to interpret information; or to give
his opinions; or to furnish clarification to the appellant. The query of the appellant
does not cover under the definition of information under 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act.
The CPIO can only provide information which is available in the record or is held
with the public authority.



                                                                            Page 2 of 6


 7.    The Commission referred to the definition of information u/s 
Section 2(f)
 of
the RTI Act, 2005 which is reproduced below:

      "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents,
      memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks,
      contracts, report, papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic
      form and information relating to any private body which can be accessed by
      a public authority under any other law for the time being in force."

Furthermore, a reference can also be made to the relevant extract of 
Section 2 (j)
 of
the RTI Act, 2005 which reads as under:

      "(j) right to information" means the right to information accessible under this
      Act which is held by or under the control of any public authority and includes
      ........"

In this context a reference was made to the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in 2011
(8) SCC 497 (
CBSE and Anr. Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay and Ors
), wherein it
was held as under:


      35..... "It is also not required to provide 'advice' or 'opinion' to an applicant,
      nor required to obtain and furnish any 'opinion' or 'advice' to an applicant.

      The reference to 'opinion' or 'advice' in the definition of 'information' in
      
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers to such material available in the records of
      the public authority. Many public authorities have, as a public relation
      exercise, provide advice, guidance and opinion to the citizens. But that is
      purely voluntary and should not be confused with any obligation under the
      
RTI Act
."

Furthermore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Khanapuram Gandaiah Vs.
Administrative Officer and Ors. Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.34868 OF 2009
(Decided on January 4, 2010) had held as under:

      6. "....
Under the RTI Act
 "information" is defined under 
Section 2(f)
 which
      provides:

                                                                              Page 3 of 6


       "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents,
      memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks,
      contracts, report, papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic
      form and information relating to any private body which can be accessed by
      a public authority under any other law for the time being in force."

      This definition shows that an applicant under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act can get
      any information which is already in existence and accessible to the public
      authority under law. Of course, under the 
RTI Act
 an applicant is entitled to
      get copy of the opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he cannot ask for
      any information as to why such opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc. have
      been passed."

      7. "....the Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material
      which is not before him; or any information he could have obtained under law.
      Under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such
      information which can be accessed by the "public authority" under any other
      law for the time being in force. The answers sought by the petitioner in the
      application could not have been with the public authority nor could he have
      had access to this information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged to give
      any reasons as to why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was
      before him."

Similarly, the High Court of Bombay in 
Dr. Celsa Pinto, Ex-Officio Joint
Secretary (School Education) vs The Goa State Information Commission
 on 3
April, 2008 (2008 (110) Bom L R 1238) had held as under:


      "
Section 2(f)
 -Information means any material in any form, including records,
      documents, memos e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars,
      orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material
      held in any electronic form and information relating to any private body which
      can be accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being

                                                                             Page 4 of 6

       in force; The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the question
      why which would be the same thing as asking the reason for a justification for
      a particular thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot expect to
      communicate to the citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not
      done in the sense of a justification because the citizen makes a requisition
      about information. Justifications are matter within the domain of adjudicating
      authorities and cannot properly be classified as information."

      The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the question why
      which would be the same thing as asking the reason for a justification for a
      particular thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot expect to
      communicate to the citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not
      done in the sense of a justification because the citizen makes a requisition
      about information. Justifications are matter within the domain of adjudicating
      authorities and cannot properly be classified as information."

8.    With the above observations, the appeal is disposed of.

9.    Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.



                                        Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरज कुमार गु ा)
                                      Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )

                                                          िदनां क / Date:-02.06.2020



Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#ािपत ित)

S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),
(011-26105682)




                                                                           Page 5 of 6

 Addresses of the parties:

1.    The CPIO, MOIL Limited,
      Nodal CPIO, RTI Cell, MOIL Bhawan,
      1A, Katol Road, Dsitrict Nagpur, Maharashtra-440013.



2.    Shri Rajkumar Choudhary,





                                                             Page 6 of 6