[Cites 
21
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


T C Gupta vs Chief Commissioner Of Income Tax (Cca), ... on 20 January, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                              के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                           बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                         नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


Files No.: CIC/CCITB/A/2020/135919 +
           CIC/CCITB/A/2021/626677

T C Gupta                                             ......अपीलकता /Appellant


                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम
CPIO,
O/o Pr. Chief Commissioner Of
Income Tax, Karnataka & Goa
Region, Bangalore, RTI Cell,
CR Building, No.1, Queen's
Road, Bangalore-560001,
Karnataka.                                         .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                   :   26/12/2022
Date of Decision                  :   17/01/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

Note - The above mentioned Appeals have been clubbed together for decision
as these are based on identical subject of RTI Applications.

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application(s) filed on       :   11/06/2020 & 23/03/2021
CPIO replied on                   :   13/07/2020 & 21/04/2021
First appeal (s) filed on         :   24/07/2020 & 28/04/2021
First Appellate Authority order   :   24/08/2020 & 25/06/2021
2nd Appeal (s)/Complaint dated    :   08/11/2020 & 28/06/2021

                          CIC/CCITB/A/2021/135919
Information sought
:

                                        1


 The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 11.06.2020 seeking the following
information:



"PCCIT Bangalore office filed WP No.43819/2019 in Bangalore High Court for an
amount of cost of Rs. 5000/- only. This is a case of corruption and misuse of
powers as well as process of law. Please provide following information:-



1. Copy of note sheet regarding decision making for filing the Wp.

2. Copy of authorisation issued to the DCIT (HQ) for filing false and baseless facts
under sworn statement in the court.

3. Allow inspection and extracts of the relevant records."



The CPIO furnished a point-wise reply to the appellant on 13.07.2020 stating as
under:-



Information sought                          Reply
PCCIT Bangalore office filed WP             The information desired vide your application is
No.43819/2019 in Bangalore High             exempt
 u/s 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 as the
Court for an amount of cost of Rs.          information desired is personal in nature. You have

5000/- only. This is a case of corruption   failed to mention the public interest involved in the
and misuse of powers as well as             information desired, thereby invoking the exemption
process of law. Please provide              provision
 u/s 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. The matter
following information.                      as narrated by you in you application is sub-judice and
                                            though you have stated that the disclosure is covered

1. Copy of note sheet regarding             by the decision of the CIC in your own case, the details
decision making for filing the Wp.          of the same have not been furnished.

                                            However, the decision of the CIC in the c/o Milap

2. Copy of authorisation issued to the      Choraria Vs Dept. of Revenue Dt. 27.07.2009 finds
DCIT (HQ) for filing false and baseless     direct application in the instant case. The CIC in the
facts under sworn statement in the          said case has upheld the rights of the Public authority
court.                                      as no public interest is being served by the personal
                                            interest of the applicant and it also violates the norms

3. Allow inspection and extracts of the     of equity as it comprises the ability of the public
relevant records.                           authority in the litigation pursued.



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 24.07.2020. FAA's order
dated 24.08.2020, directed the CPIO to provide the information to the appellant
within the ambit of the 
RTI Act
 2005.



In compliance with FAA's order, the CPIO furnished a revised point wise reply to
the appellant on 24.09.2020 stating as under:-



Information sought                          Reply

                                                 2

 The office of Pr. CCIT Bangalore filed    The issue has been examined as directed by the
WP No.43819/2019 in Bangalore High        Appellate Authority in the light of the decisions
Court for an amount of cost of Rs.        mentioned the order dated 20.08.2020 and the
5000/- in this regard:                    information sought by the Applicant. It will be
                                          pertinent to note that the High Court of Delhi order
1. Copy of note sheet regarding           relied upon by the Appellant in the c/o M/s 
MCD Vs R

decision making for filing the Wp.        K Jain in WP Np. 14120/2009, the issue contended
                                          was with regard to failure of the Application to
2. Copy of authorization issued to the    exercise the remedy of going before the Appellate


DCIT (HQ) for filing false and baseless   Authority. The High Court in its order refers to a
facts under sworn statement in the        decision of the CIC relied upon by the petitioner
court.                                    Department in the c/o Milap Choraria Vs Jai Raj Singh
                                          Commissioner of Income Tax dated 09.04.2007 where

3. Allow inspection and extracts of the   it did not find any merit. Though the Hon'ble High
relevant records.                         Court observed that there was no provision in the 
RTI
                                          Act, 2005
 to withhold information that is subjudice, it
                                          did not consider the decision of the CIC in the c/o
                                          
Milap Choraria Vs. CBDT
 dated 27.07.2009 which has
                                          been relied upon in the reply dated 13.07.2020. The
                                          relevant paras of the order wherein the CIC has made
                                          its observation is reproduced as under:


                                          "It has been argued before us that within the meaning
                                          of 
Section 2(n)
 a public authority is a 'third-party',
                                          who under 
Section 11(1)
 can hold or supply an
                                          information confidentially."

                                          "...40. The respondent have derived strength from
                                          
sections 123
,
124
 and 
129
 of the Indian Evidence Act,
                                          which authorize them under certain circumstances to
                                          withhold from public disclosure information held by
                                          the officers of the public authority in confidence,
                                          except when public interest warrants such disclosure.

                                          41.They have further argued that these provisions of
                                          the 
Indian Evidence Act
 were entirely consistent with
                                          the provisions under 
Section 11(1)
 of the RTI Act. The
                                          CPIO is duty-bound under 
section 11(1)
 to consider the
                                          grounds which a public authority urges to keep
                                          confidential information undisclosed and to decide on
                                          the validity of the grounds for its decision."

                                          In view of the above observation, the CIC concluded as
                                          follows:

                                          "there are compelling grounds for them to hold
                                          confidential information relating to how they wished
                                          to defend their legal position in litigation or a
                                          threatened litigation. Their reference to the violation
                                          of the norms of equity in allowing the very person,
                                          who seeks to drag the public authority to court, all
                                          information about how the public authority wished to
                                          defend itself is also quite convincing."



                                               3


                                     In view of the foregoing, the CIC went on to dismiss
                                    the complaint of the Applicant. Relying on the above
                                    narrative of the CIC in the decision relied upon, the
                                    information sought by the Applicant is hereby denied.



                                    In view of the above, the inspection of the records is
                                    also denied.



                            CIC/CCITB/A/2021/626677

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 23.03.2021 seeking the following
information:

    "Allow inspection and to take extracts of file of WP No. 43819/2019 in case of
    TC Gupta.



   I state that the information does not fall within the restrictions contained in
   the 
RTI Act
 and to the best of my knowledge pertains to your office. The
   matter being sub judice is no ground to claim information as exempt. 
Under
   RTI Act
 information can be claimed as exempt only under 
section 8
 and 
9
.
   Delhi high court in order Dt.23.09.2010 in WP No. 1120/2009 in the c/o. R K
   Jain and the CIC, in the order Dt.15.03.2019 in the appeal No.
   CIC/CCITJ/A/2007/165443-BJ in the c/o T C Gupta has held that the matter
   being subjudice before court is not one of the categories of information which
   is exempt under any clause of 
section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act."



The CPIO furnished a point wise reply to the appellant on 21.04.2021 stating as
under:-



 
Information sought                               Reply
 Allow inspection and to take extracts of The application sought in the present
 file of WP No. 43819/2019 in the c/o. T C application is the same as in the
 Gupta                                     application made under reg, No.
                                           CCITB/R/E/20/00062 Dt.11.06.2020. The





                                          4

  I state that the information does not fall     reply has been provided by the CPIO vide
 within the restrictions contained in the RTI   his letter Dt.13.07.2020.
 Act and to the best of my knowledge
 pertains to your office. The matter being      
The RTI Act, 2005
 does not provide for
 subjudice is no ground to claim                repetition I the information sought.
 information as exempt. 
Under RTI Act
           Reliance is placed on the decision of the
 information can be claimed as exempt only      Central Information Commission, dated
 under 
section 8
 and 
9
. Delhi high court in     25.06.2014 in the case of Shri Ramesh
 order Dt.23.09.2010 in WP No. 1120/2009        
Chand Jain Vs. Delhi Transport

 in the c/o. R K Jain and the CIC, in the       Corporation, CNCTD, Delhi vide
 order Dt.15.03.2019 in the appeal No.          CIC/AD/A/2013/001326-SA, dated
 CIC/CCITJ/A/2007/165443-BJ in the c/o T C      25.06.2014,it is stated that:


 Gupta has held that the matter being           " ..
 subjudice before court is not one of the            (i)     No scope of repeating under
 categories of information which is exempt                   RTI
 under any clause of 
section 8(1)
 of the RTI         (ii)    Citizen has no right to repeat
 Act.                                                (iii)   Repetition shall be ground of
                                                             refusal
                                                     (iv)    Appeals can be rejected.
                                                                                       ..."
                                                In the view of the above, the application
                                                is rejected.


Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 28.04.2021. FAA's order
dated 25.06.2019, upheld the reply of CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant set of Second Appeal (s).



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present through video-conference.

Respondent: Pankaj, DCIT (Hq- Admn.) & CPIO (I/c.) present through video-
conference.



The Commission remarked at the outset that the instant Appeal of the Appellant
has been heard together simultaneously along with his eleven more Second
Appeals. As regards his submissions to the instant Appeals, he expressed his
dissatisfaction with CPIO's reply on the following arguments -



      "....(1). The CPIO was requested to provide information relating to filing of
      WP No. 43819/2019 in the High Court, relying on the CIC decision in No.
      CIC/CCITJ/A/2007/165443-BJ dated 15.3.2019 between the same parties.



                                                5


       The WP was filed in the High Court involving a very small issue of cost of Rs.
      5000/-, thus it was sheer wastage of public time and money and burdening
      the already over-burdened Courts.

      (2). The CPIO vide reply dated 21.4.2021 rejected the application on the
      ground of repetition.

      (3). Against the CPIO order 1st appeal was filed on 28.4.2021 stating that
      the CPIO has rejected the application on the illegal and malafide ground of
      repetition where there was no public interest. The CPIO also did not provide
      any opportunity of being heard.

      (4) The AA in its order dated 256.2021 dismissed the appeal relying on the
      ground of repetition. The AA did not provide any opportunity of being heard.
      He also did not discuss the CIC decision and other issues raised in appeal.
      (5) The CPIO and AA dismissed the applications illegally and malafidely,
      without discussing and considering the relied upon decisions and facts. The
      alleged earlier RTI application was rejected on the illegal ground that the
      matter is sub-judice. Now, at the time of filing this RTI application, the
      alleged sub-judice matter had already been decided. Therefore, even the
      ground had changed in this application..."



The Appellant further alleged the malpractices adopted by the Respondent
organization in wasting an amount of around Rs. 2 lakhs towards the counsel
fees from the public exchequer for waiver of a petty cost of Rs. 5,000/- imposed
against the Respondent. In this regard, he also sought the intervention of the
Commission to facilitate him the reasons for incurring such a huge amount of
expenses without any basis. In fact , towards the end of the discussions, the
Appellant agreed for not sharing the legal advice/ opinion but just the
administrative noting on the file.



In response to Appellant's contentions, the CPIO reiterated the contents of his
written submissions dated 20.12.2022, which are reproduced as under -



       "....(i) The applicant is a practicing advocate and a retired employee of this
Department. He has instituted hundreds of cases against the department involving
himself as an Applicant or Counsel. 
RTI Act
 is being used by him extensively to
grind his axe against the officers whom he wants to target for his own
professional gains. He has also filed hundreds of RTI applications. In the instant
case the issue was that Department filed a Writ Petition which was allowed by the
Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka waiving cost of Rs 5000/- imposed on the
Department by the Hon'ble Central Administrative Tribunal. The Respondents are
at liberty to defend their cause and to prevent any decision from becoming a



                                         6

 precedent. Present application is a means to target the officers involved in the
filing of the WP which is a sovereign right of the Department.



Day to day functioning of the department is hampered and morale of the officers
is adversely affected when such fictitious and vexatious applications attempts to
fish out some information just to target them. For filing of the Writ Petition (to
which the applicant was a party) the applicant has imputed motives on the
officers calling them various names.



(i) Though the AA has relied on the decision in the case of Ashok Kumar Sharma,
the decision of the C/o. 
Milap Choraria Vs Dept. of Revenue
 dated 27.07.2009 is
squarely applicable wherein it is held as under :




    "It has been argued before us that within the meaning of 
Section 2(n)
, a public
    authority is a 'third-party, who under 
Section 11(1)
 confidentially." can hold or
    supply an information confidentiality.

    The respondents have derived strength from 
Sections 123
, 
124
 and 
129
 of the
    Indian Evidence Act, which authorize them under certain circumstances to
    withhold from public disclosure information held by the officers of the public
    authority in confidence, except when public interest warrants such disclosure.
    They have further argued thot these provisions of the 
Indian Evidence Act
 were
    entirely consistent with the provisions under 
Section 11(1)
 of the RTI Act. The
    CPIO is duty-bound under 
Section 11(1)
 to consider the grounds which a public
    authority urges to keep confidential information undisclosed and to decide on
    the validity of the grounds for its decision."

In view of the above observation, the CIC concluded as follows:

    "there are compelling grounds for them to hold confidential information
    relating to how they wished to defend their legal position in litigation or a
    threatened litigation. Their reference to the violation of the norms of equity in
    allowing the very person, who seeks to drag the public authority to court, all
    information about how the public authority wished to defend itself is also
    quite convincing."

    In view of the foregoing, the CIC went on to dismiss the complaint of the
    Applicant. Relying on the above narrative of the CIC in the decision relied upon,
    the information and inspection of the records was also denied.
    (in) "He who comes into equity must come with clean hands," is a settled
    doctrine in Indian jurisprudence. The appellant in the instant case is a
    compulsive litigant and has been filing frivolous and vexatious RTI Application
    seeking information with intent to disrupt the ordinary day to day functioning
    of the administration. His RTI applications cannot be considered as a mere



                                         7

    exercise of one's lawful rights. Rather it is often seen that officers have been
   targeted by the appellant by making scurrilous remarks against them.

   (iv) Reliance is placed on the following decisions of the CIC (a) Neha Srivastav
   v. Trade marks Registry observed as follows: ".there are no provisions in the
   Act for redressal of grievances in the garb of seeking information. The Rules
   are to be read with Act and in case can actually override the Act."



(b) The CIC in the c/o 
Amar Kumar Jha Vs Indian Army
 made the following
observation:




   "The Appellant appears to be doing so despite the express knowledge of the
   fact that he is pursuing a matter of no larger public interest, rather concerning
   only his perceived personal grievance. It is appalling to note that the public
   authority is being unabashedly harassed by filing umpteen vexations RTI
   applications. It is also not clear as to what kind of information will satisfy the
   Appellant as it appears he is merely intending to compel the public authorities
   into addressing his grievances. This being the ulterior motive is manifest from
   the bare perusal of the queries of these RTI applications..."



(v) The Hon'ble Supreme Court in its decision in 
Central Board of Secondary
Education and another vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay and Others
, (2011) 8 SCC 97 has
held as under


    "
The Act
 should not be allowed to be misused or abused, to become a tool to
    obstruct the national development and integration, or to destroy the peace,
    tranquility and harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be converted into a
    tool of oppression or intimidation of honest officials striving to do their duty.
    The nation does not want a scenario where 75% of the staff of public
    authorities spends 75% of their time in collecting and furnishing information to
    applicants instead of discharging their regular duties. The threat of penalties
    under the 
RTI Act
 and the pressure of the authorities under the 
RTI Act
 should
    not lead to employees of a public authorities prioritising 'information
    furnishing', at the cost of their normal and regular duties."



Also, such denial of frivolous application has been upheld by the decision of the
Hon'ble CIC in the case of S K Lal Vs Ministry of Railways (Appeal No.
CIC/OK/A/2006/00268- 272 dated 29.12.2006) wherein the Hon'ble CIC has
observed that the 
RTI Act
 allows the citizen to seek any information other than the
10 categories exempted under 
Sec. 8
, it does not mean that the public authorities
are allowed to entertain all sort of frivolous application. In the instant case to
provide the information sought, a lot of inconvenience will be caused to the public
authority to compile the information sought by him. Manpower that is devoted


                                         8

 towards carrying out regular activity will have to be diverted to compile the (vi)
information.

(vii) Reliance is placed on the decision of the Hon'ble High Court of Gujarat at
dated 14.11.2014, in SPA No.16480/2014 (
Pankesh Manubhai Patel Vs Chief
Information Commissioners and Ors
) as under:




     we agree with the respondents that collecting this information would
     disproportionately divert their resources from the day to day work. The
     appellant has not established any large public interest, which would warrant
     a directive to the respondents to collect the information, sought by him, even
     at the cost of diverting their resources from their day to day work. In the
     above context, we also note the following observations of the Supreme Court
     in Central Education and Anr. Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay and Ors. Board of
     Secondary Indiscriminate and impractical demands or directions under RTl
     act for disclosure of all and sundry information ( unrelated to transparency
     and accountability in the functioning of public authorities and eradication of
     corruption) would be counterproductive as it will adversely affect the
     efficiency of the administration and result in the executive getting bogged
     down with the non productive work of collecting and furnishing information.
     
The Act
 should not be allowed to be misused or abused, to become a tool to
     obstruct the national development and integration, or to destroy the peace,
     tranquility and harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be converted into a
     tool of oppression or intimidation of honest officials striving to do their duty.



     The nation does not want a scenario where 75% of the staff of public
     authorities spends 75% of their time in collecting and furnishing information
     to applicants instead of discharging their regular duties. The threat of
     penalties under the 
RTI Act
 and the pressure of the authorities under the 
RTI
     Act
 should not lead to employees of public authorities prioritizing "

     information furnishing" at the cost of their normal and regular duties".

Having considered the relationship between the petitioner and the respondent
authorities and the information asked for by the petitioner, this court finds that,
the view taken by the commission in the facts of this case does not call for any
interference. Further, the commission has noted the observations of Hon'ble the
Supreme Court of India, which would apply with full force in the facts of this case.
This court does not see any infirmity in the impugned decision of the commission.
This petition therefore needs to be dismissed".



In conclusion, the CPIO to a query from the Commission explained that the
Appellant was arrayed as one of the respondents in the above mentioned Writ
Petition and the case has since been concluded by the Hon'ble High Court


                                          9

 whereby the cost has also been waived off as imposed by the Hon'ble CAT. Lastly,
the CPIO agreed to abide by the direction of the Commission.



Decision:



The Commission remarked at the outset that the core issue raised by the
Appellant in the instant Appeals was denial of information by the CPIO by
invoking 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act and also on the plea that the matter with
respect to W.P. 43819/2019 is sub-judice before the Hon'ble High Court of
Karnataka. In response to it, the CPIO reiterated their stand for denial of
information under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act and further apprised the Commission
that as on date, the case attains finality with the waiver of cost imposed by the
Hon'ble CAT against the officer of Respondent organization and also with the fact
that the Appellant in the averred Writ Petition has been arrayed as one of the
Respondents.



Having observed as above, the Commission is of the considered opinion that
complete denial of information by the CPIO in response to instant RTI Applications
under 
section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act was not appropriate. The CPIO instead of
proper application of mind with regards to applicability of 
Section 10
 of RTI Act as
for severance of records vaguely denied the information altogether. The only
pertinent exemption from disclosure of information against the information
sought appears to be with respect to the names and details of third party
officer(s) and advices/opinions of the legal counsel which are reflected on the
note sheet as sought for at point no. 1 in case file no. CIC/CCITB/A/2021/135919
and cannot be divulged considering the exemptions envisaged under 
Section
8(1)(j)
 and 
Section 8(1)(e)
 of the RTI Act. However, in response to point no. 2 in
the said Second Appeal the Commission as the query raised by the Appellant is
based on the conjectures which does not strictly conform to 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI
Act.



Now, upon insistence of the Appellant and considering the fact that the writ
petition in question has already attained the final verdict and in the said case the
Appellant was one of the Respondent party, the CPIO in the spirit of 
RTI Act
 is
hereby directed to provide the relevant information sought for at point no. 1 of
to the Appellant, barring the legal advice/ opinion and in doing so the CPIO is at
liberty to invoke 
Section 10
 of the RTI Act for redacting the information related to
the personal information of third parties which is otherwise stands exempted
from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act. For the sake of clarity, extracts of

Section 10
 is reproduced as under:



                                         10


       10.Severability.--



       (1) Where a request for access to information is rejected on the ground that
it is in relation to information which is exempt from disclosure, then,
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, access may be provided to that
part of the record which does not contain any information which is exempt from
disclosure under this Act and which can reasonably be severed from any part that
contains exempt information.



The above said directions should be complied with by the CPIO within 15 days
from the date of receipt of this order and a compliance report to this effect be
duly sent to the Commission by the CPIO stipulating the details of the inspection
provided and copy of the documents provided thereof.



                   The appeal (s) are disposed of accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                        11