[Cites 
33
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


C F Mathew vs Chief Commissioner Of Income Tax (Cca) , ... on 23 January, 2020


                                       के ीय सूचना आयोग
                             Central Information Commission
                                   बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                              Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                                नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या / Second Appeal No.:- CIC/CCIKO/A/2018/142113-BJ

Mr. C. F. Mathew

                                                                         ....अपीलकता/Appellant
                                           VERSUS
                                              बनाम

CPIO & Dy. Commissioner of Income Tax (Exemptions)
Office of the Commissioner of Income Tax (Exemptions)
2nd Floor, San Juan Tower, Old Railway Station Road
Kochi - 682018
                                                                      ... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing       :                     21.01.2020
Date of Decision      :                     23.01.2020

Date of RTI application                                                     28.10.2017
CPIO's response                                                             21.12.2017
Date of the First Appeal                                                    31.12.2017
First Appellate Authority's response                                        06.04.2018
Date of diarised receipt of Appeal by the Commission                        05.07.2018

                                           ORDER

FACTS:

The Appellant vide his RTI application sought information on 05 points regarding the trust deed
of the Chaldean Syrian Church of the East, certified copy of the latest demand notice sent to
PAN No. (as mentioned in the RTI application) by the IT Dept., certified copy of IT demand, if
paid, bank details of the payment made including the amount with date and other issues related
thereto.

The CPIO, vide its letter dated 21.12.2017, stated that the information sought did not pertain to
any larger public interest and relied on various decisions of the Commission which prohibit
dissemination of information flowing from IT returns, filed by the third parties as the
information is held in fiduciary capacity reposing confidence which is not meant to be breached
unless it serves a larger public interest, and refused the information sought by the Appellant.
Dissatisfied with the response of the CPIO, the Appellant approached the FAA. The FAA, vide
its order dated 06.04.2018, upheld the CPIO's response.



                                                                                     Page 1 of 10


 HEARING:

Facts emerging during the hearing:

The following were present:

Appellant: Mr. Joseph Therattil Appellant's representative, through VC;
Respondent: Mr. Solomon, DCIT through VC;



The Appellant's representative reiterated the contents of the RTI application and stated that the
information sought was wrongly denied by the Respondent. He further alleged
misappropriation/diversion of public funds in one of their trust's account and therefore requested
for the desired information to prove his allegations. He further relied on its written submissions.
The Commission was in receipt of a written submission from the Appellant dated 13.01.2020
wherein he submitted that he is an active member of the Chaldean Syrian Church of the East
located in Trissur, Kerala. Recently in the year 2017, his church had been served with an IT
Demand notice for approximately Rs 1,39,00,000/-. Since, the IT notice had been served on a
"Trust" named as M/s Chaldean Syrian Church of the East, he was naturally concerned about his
contributions. It was further submitted that, he could not approach the Registration Department
of Kerala for the same without sufficient details like Registration Number and the Date of
Registration of the Trust. Hence, it was prayed to the Commission to direct the CPIO to furnish
the requisite information as sought in the RTI application. In its reply, the Respondent reiterated
the response of the CPIO/FAA and further stated that consent of the third party was sought who
denied parting with any information relating to them. It was further submitted that being active
member of the Church, the Appellant could get the information from the Church itself.
Furthermore, no larger public interest was involved in disclosure of information hence, it was
denied quoting several decisions of the Commission which prohibit dissemination of information
flowing from IT returns, filed by the third parties as the information is held in fiduciary capacity
reposing confidence which is not meant to be breached unless it serves a larger public interest.
The FAA had also upheld the decision of the CPIO. On being queried by the Commission, whether
any exemption under 
Sections 11
/
12A
/ 
80G
 of the IT Act, 1961 were claimed by the trust referred to
in the RTI application, the Respondent replied in the affirmative.



The Commission observed that in a similar matter where information regarding charitable trusts
claiming exemption
 u/s 12A
 of the IT Act, 1961 was sought, the Division Bench of the Commission
in Appeal No. CIC/BS/A/2016/001091-BJ-Final dated 05.01.2018 while observing that the matter
certainly involved larger public interest since the Government was granting exemptions to the Third
Party from payment of taxes allowed for disclosure of information. In the said matter, the
Commission made the following observation:



"The Commission took note of the issue regarding the "personal information" held by an individual
in its personal capacity and the personal information held by the entities/corporations/trusts in their
private capacity. 
In this context, a reference was drawn on the Hon'ble Delhi High Court decision in

Naresh Trehan vs. Rakesh Kumar Gupta and Ors.
( 2015) 216 DLT 156 wherein it was held:




       "20. It has been contended by the petitioners that the expression "personal information"

       must also extend to information relating to corporate entities. Inasmuch as they may also fall
       within the definition of expression "person" under the 
General Clauses Act, 1897
 as well as
       under the 
Income Tax Act, 1961
. However, I am unable to accept this contention for the
       reason that the expression "personal information" as used in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the
       Act has to be read in the context of information relating to an individual. A plain reading of
       the aforesaid clause would indicate that the expression "personal information" is linked with


                                                                                          Page 2 of 10

 "invasion of privacy of the individual". The use of the word "the" before the word
"individual" immediately links the same with the expression "personal information"



21. Black's law dictionary, sixth edition, inter alia, defines the word "personal" as under:-

"The word "personal" means appertaining to the person; belonging to an individual; limited
to the person; having the nature or partaking of the qualities of human beings, or of movable
property."



23. In my view, the aforesaid reasoning would also be applicable to the expression
"personal" used in 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act. The expression 'individual' must be construed
in an expansive sense and would include a body of individuals. The said exemption would be
available even to unincorporated entities as also private, closely held undertaking which are
in substance alter egos of their shareholders. However, the expression individual cannot be
used as a synonym for the expression 'person'. 
Under the General Clauses Act, 1897
 a
person is defined to "include any company or association or body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not". Thus, whereas a person would include an individual as well as
incorporated entities and artificial persons, the expression 'individual' cannot be interpreted
to include such entities. The context in which, the expression "personal information" is used
would also exclude it application to large widely held corporations. While, confidential
information of a corporation is exempt from disclosure under 
Section 8(1) (d)
 of the Act,
there is no scope to exclude other information relating to such corporations under 
Section
8(1)(j)
 of the Act as the concept of a personal information cannot in ordinary language be
understood to mean information pertaining to a public corporation."



22. A perusal of the above definition also indicates that the ordinary usage of the word
"personal" is in the context of an individual human being and not a corporate entity. The
U.S. Supreme Court has also interpreted the expression "personal" to be used in the context
of an individual human being and not a corporate entity. In the case of Federal
Communications Commission v. AT&T Inc: 2011 US LEXIS 1899 the US Supreme Court
considered the meaning of the expression "personal privacy" in the context of the 
Freedom
of Information Act
, which required Federal Agencies to make certain records and documents
publically available on request. Such disclosure was exempt if the records "could reasonably
be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy". The U.S. Supreme
Court held that the expression "Personal" used in the aforesaid context could not be
extended to corporations because the word "personal" ordinarily refers to individuals. The
Court held that the expression "personal" must be given its ordinary meaning. The relevant
extract of the said judgment is as under: "Person" is a defined term in the statute;

"personal" is not. When a statute does not define a term, we typically "give the phrase its
ordinary meaning," [Johnson v. United States, 559 U.S., 559 U.
S. 133
, 
130
 S. Ct. 1265, 176
L. Ed. 2d 1, 8 (2010)]. "Personal" ordinarily refers to individuals. We do not usually speak
of personal characteristics, personal effects, personal correspondence, personal influence, or
personal tragedy as referring to corporations or other artificial entities. This is not to say
that corporations do not have correspondence, influence, or tragedies of their own, only that
we do not use the word "personal" to describe them. Certainly, if the chief executive officer
of a corporation approached the chief financial officer and said, "I have something personal
to tell you," we would not assume the CEO was about to discuss company business.
Responding to a request for information, an individual might say, "that's personal." A
company spokesman, when asked for information about the company, would not. In fact, we
often use the word "personal" to mean precisely the opposite of businessrelated: We speak of
personal expenses and business expenses, personal life and work life, personal opinion and a
company's view."



                                                                                  Page 3 of 10


 
Moreover, the Commission also examined the nature of fiduciary relationship involved in the instant
matter whereby the Respondent denied the information of ITRs under 
Section 8(1)(e)
 of the RTI
act,2005. The Commission referred to the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in 
CBSE v. Aditya
Bandhopadhyay
 (2011) 8 SCC 497 wherein it was held as under:




       22. ".... But the words 'information available to a person in his fiduciary relationship' are
       used in 
section 8(1)(e)
 of RTI Act in its normal and well recognized sense, that is to refer to
       persons who act in a fiduciary capacity, with reference to a specific beneficiary or
       beneficiaries who are to be expected to be protected or benefited by the actions of the
       fiduciary - a trustee with reference to the beneficiary of the trust, a guardian with reference
       to a minor/physically/infirm/mentally challenged, a parent with reference to a child, a lawyer
       or a chartered accountant with reference to a client, a doctor or nurse with reference to a
       patient, an agent with reference to a principal, a partner with reference to another partner, a
       director of a company with reference to a share-holder, an executor with reference to a
       legatee, a receiver with reference to the parties to a lis, an employer with reference to the
       confidential information relating to the employee, and an employee with reference to
       business dealings/transaction of the employer."



Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court of Gujarat in Rajendra Vasantlal Shah vs. Central Information
Commissioner and Ors. AIR 2011 Guj 70 had observed that any statutory body/
Institution/association meant to serve public good cannot claim to be working in a fiduciary
capacity, and held as under:



       "8.4. Respondent No. 4 is a religious charitable Trust, functioning under the Scheme
       formulated by the District Court, having considerable public importance and registered
       under the Bombay Public Trust Act, as a religious charitable Trust. Considering its nature
       and activities, emerging from the objects of the Trust, it can be stated that disclosure of such
       information is in relation to any public interest of activity. The Trust is engaged, in public
       activities, disclosure of its statements and accounts of income-tax returns and assessments
       orders cannot be withheld under 
Section 8(1)(e)
 or (j)of the 
R.T.I. Act
."



In this context, the Commission draws reference to the observations made by the Hon'ble Delhi High
Court in WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 7265 OF 2007 (Date of Decision : 25th September, 2009)
wherein the Court has clarified the definition of "information under 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act,2005
and held as under:



       8. "Information as defined in 
Section 2(f)
 means details or material available with the public
       authority. The later portion of 
Section 2(f)
 expands the definition to include details or
       material which can be accessed under any other law from others. The two definitions have to
       be read harmoniously. The term ―held by or under the control of any public authority in
       
Section 2(j)
 of the RTI Act has to be read in a manner that it effectuates and is in harmony
       with the definition of the term ―information as defined in 
Section 2(f)
. The said expression
       used in 
Section 2(j)
 of the RTI Act should not be read in a manner that it negates or nullifies
       definition of the term ―information in 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act. It is well settled that an
       interpretation which renders another provision or part thereof redundant or superfluous
       should be avoided. Information as defined in 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act includes in its ambit,
       the information relating to any private body which can be accessed by public authority under
       any law for the time being in force. Therefore, if a public authority has a right and is entitled
       to access information from a private body, under any other law, it is ―information as
       defined in 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act. The term ―held by the or under the control of the
       public authority used in 
Section 2(j)
 of the RTI Act will include information which the
       public authority is entitled to access under any other law from a private body.

                                                                                           Page 4 of 10


        13. Information available with the public authority falls within 
section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act.

       The last part of 
section 2 (f)
 broadens the scope of the term information' to include
       information which is not available, but can be accessed by the public authority from a
       private authority. Such information relating to a private body should be accessible to the
       public authority under any other law. Therefore, 
section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act requires
       examination of the relevant statute or law, as broadly understood, under which a public
       authority can access information from a private body. If law or statute permits and allows
       the public authority to access the information relating to a private body, it will fall within
       the four corners of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act."



Furthermore, the Commission referred to the observations made by Hon'ble Courts in the light of
disclosure of information in "public interest", keeping in view the true spirit behind the
promulgation of the 
RTI Act, 2005
, which are as under:



The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in SLP(C) NO. 7526/2009 (
CBSE & Anr. Vs. Aditya
Bandopadhyay & Ors
) had observed as under:




       "37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and right to information are
       intended to be formidable tools in the hands of responsible citizens to fight corruption and to
       bring in transparency and accountability. The provisions of 
RTI Act
 should be enforced
       strictly and all efforts should be made to bring to light the necessary information under
       Clause (b) of 
Section 4(1)
 of the Act which relates to securing transparency and
       accountability in the working of public authorities and in discouraging corruption"



The High Court of Delhi in 
General Manager Finance Air India Ltd & Anr v. Virender Singh, LPA
No.
 205/2012, Decided On: 16.07.2012 regarding the disclosure of information for public interest,
held:




       "8. 
The RTI Act
, as per its preamble was enacted to enable the citizens to secure access to
       information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency and
       accountability in the working of every public authority. An informed citizenry and
       transparency of information have been spelled out as vital to democracy and to contain
       corruption and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities accountable to the governed.
       The said legislation is undoubtedly one of the most significant enactments of independent
       India and a landmark in governance."



The High Court of Bombay in Shonkh Technology International Ltd. v. State Information
Commission Maharashtra Konkan Region, Appellate Authority and United Telecom Limited v. State
Information Commission Maharashtra Konkan Region and Ors., W.P. Nos. 2912 and 3137 of 2011
decided on 01.07.2011 held as under

       "
The RTI Act
 is an Act to provide for setting out the practical regime of right to information
       for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order to
       promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority. The
       preamble of the 
RTI Act
 itself refers to this aspect and the constitutional principles enshrined
       in several articles of the Constitution. It is very clearly postulated that democracy requires
       an informed citizenry and transparency of information which are vital to its functioning and
       also to contain corruption and to hold the Governments and their instrumentalities
       accountable to the governed. The revelation of information in actual practice is likely to
       conflict with other public interests including efficient operations of the Governments,
       optimum use of limited fiscal resources and the preservation of confidentiality of sensitive
       information. Therefore, the RTI Act seeks to harmonize these conflicting interests while
       preserving the paramount nature of democratic ideals."

                                                                                            Page 5 of 10


 Moreover, the purpose and object of the promulgation of the 
RTI Act,2005
 was to make the public
authorities more transparent and accountable to the public and to provide freedom to every citizen
to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, consistent with public
interest, in order to promote openness, transparency and accountability in administration and in
relation to matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.



The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
Bihar Public Service Commission v. Saiyed Hussain
Abbas Rizwi
: (2012) 13 SCC 61 while explaining the term "Public Interest" held:


       "22. The expression "public interest" has to be understood in its true connotation so as to
       give complete meaning to the relevant provisions of the Act. The expression "public interest"

 
must be viewed in its strict sense with all its exceptions so as to justify denial of a statutory
       exemption in terms of the Act. In its common parlance, the expression "public interest", like
       "public purpose", is not capable of any precise definition. It does not have a rigid meaning, is
       elastic and takes its colour from the statute in which it occurs, the concept varying with time
       and state of society and its needs (
State of Bihar v. Kameshwar Singh
([AIR 1952 SC 252]). It
       also means the general welfare of the public that warrants recognition and protection;
       something in which the public as a whole has a stake [Black's Law Dictionary (8th Edn.)]."
It is noted that certain issues have been raised in the RTI application which relate to disclosure of
property details of the Public Charitable Trust that categorically works for the public welfare.
Moreover, during the course of the hearing it was categorically stated by the Respondent that
registration under 
Section 12A
 of the IT Act, 1961 was granted to the Third Party and that they were
claiming several exemptions/ benefits under the said Act. Therefore it is apparent that the matter
certainly involved larger public interest since the Government was granting several exemptions to
the Third Party from payment of taxes hence there ought to exist transparency and accountability on
the activities of the Third Party.




Also, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the decision of R.B.I. and Ors. V. Jayantilal N. Mistry
and Ors, Transferred Case (Civil) No. 91 of 2015 (Arising out of Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 707
of 2012 decided on 16.12.2015, while dealing with significance of free flow of information had stated
as under:



       "The ideal of 'Government by the people' makes it necessary that people have access to
       information on matters of public concern. The free flow of information about affairs of
       Government paves way for debate in public policy and fosters accountability in Government.
       It creates a condition for 'open governance' which is a foundation of democracy."



The Commission further referred to the full bench decision of the CIC in File
No.CIC/LS/A/2009/00190 dated 09.03.2010 wherein the CIC had decided on the issue of disclosure
of information by the public charitable trusts as under:



       10. "We have given a serious thought to the matter. We have also taken note of the pre-amble
       of the 
RTI Act
 which aims at promoting transparency and accountability in the working of
       the every Public Authority. In this context, it would be apt to advert to sub 
section 15
 of
       
section 2
 of the IT Act which defines "charitable purpose". This sub section is extracted
       below :- "15. 'Charitable purpose' includes relief of the poor, education, medical relief and
       advancement of any other object of general public utility.



       Needless to say, avowed purpose for which these institutions/entities come into existence is
       charity. Charity and secrecy are contradiction in terms. Any charitable institution should
       have no secrets and should be open to public for all purposes, including its finances. In other
       words, in our opinion, it will be in the larger public interest if the identity of the charitable

                                                                                           Page 6 of 10

        trusts/institutions/entities which are granted exemption from income tax under the statutory
       provisions are placed in the public domain. Hence, in exercise of powers under 
section 25(5)

       of the RTI Act, we hereby recommend that the identity of the charitable
       trusts/institutions/entities which have been granted exemption from income tax under 
section
       10
 & under 
section 11
/
12
 of the Income Tax Act is placed in public domain by way of suo-
       motu disclosure by the CBDT in terms of 
section 4(1)(b)
 r/w 
section 4(2)
 of the RTI Act."



The above mentioned decision of the CIC had been referred in File no.CIC/RM/A/2014/004628
(dated 23.12.2016) File no. CIC/RM/A/2014/ 003758/BS/9478 (dated 11.01.2016) and File
No.CIC/DS/A/2012 /000688/RM (dated 10.04.2013).



The Commission felt that the Supreme objective/ motive with which the Central/ State Information
Commission were constituted were to set out the practical regime of right to information for citizens
to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote
transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority. In the light of the preamble
of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 there are several exemptions carved out under 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act, 2005
which can be used by a Public Authority to deny information depending on the facts and
circumstances of each case.

The purpose of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 is transparency and accountability in the functioning of entities
which impact citizens' daily lives. Recognizing the significance of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 in empowering
people with the means to scrutinize government action, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in its judgment
delivered by Justice Ravindra Bhat in Indian Olympic Association -Vs- Veerish Malik and
others(WP)(C) No. 876/2007 had held as below:-



       "
The Act
 marks a legislative milestone in the post independence era to further democracy. It
       empowers citizens and information applicants to demand and be supplied with information
       about public records. Parliamentary endeavor is to extend it also to public authorities which
       impact citizens daily lives. 
The Act
 mandates disclosure of all manner of information and
       abolishes the concept of locus standi of the information applicant; no justification for
       applying (for information) is necessary; decisions and decision making processes, which
       affect lives of individuals and groups of citizens are now open to examination. Parliamentary
       intention apparently was to empower people with the means to scrutinize government and
       public processes, and ensure transparency. At the same time, the need of society at large, and
       Governments as well as individuals in particular, to ensure that sensitive information is kept
       out of bounds have also been accommodated under the Act."



Furthermore, the Commission observed that a voluntary disclosure of all information that ought to
be displayed in the public domain should be the rule and members of public who having to
seek information should be an exception. An open government, which is the cherished objective of the

RTI Act
, can be realised only if all public offices comply with proactive disclosure norms. 
Section
4(2)
 of the RTI Act mandates every public authority to provide as much information suo-motu to the
public at regular intervals through various means of communications, including the Internet, so that
the public need not resort to the use of 
RTI Act
.



The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of 
CBSE and Anr. Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay and
Ors
 2011 (8) SCC 497 held as under:




       "37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and right to information are
       intended to be formidable tools in the hands of responsible citizens to fight corruption and to
       bring in transparency and accountability. The provisions of 
RTI Act
 should be enforced
       strictly and all efforts should be made to bring to light the necessary information under


                                                                                         Page 7 of 10

        Clause (b) of 
Section 4(1)
 of the Act which relates to securing transparency and
       accountability in the working of public authorities and in discouraging corruption."



The Commission also observes the Hon'ble Delhi High Court ruling in WP (C) 12714/2009 
Delhi
Development Authority v. Central Information Commission and Another
 (delivered on: 21.05.2010),
wherein it was held as under:




       "16.It also provides that the information should be easily accessible and to the extent
       possible should be in electronic format with the Central Public Information Officer or the
       State Public Information Officer, as the case may be. The word disseminate has also been
       defined in the explanation to mean - making the information known or communicating the
       information to the public through notice boards, newspapers, public announcements, media
       broadcasts, the internet, etc. It is, therefore, clear from a plain reading of 
Section 4
 of the
       RTI Act that the information, which a public authority is obliged to publish under the said
       section should be made available to the public and specifically through the internet. There is
       no denying that the petitioner is duty bound by virtue of the provisions of 
Section 4
 of the RTI
       Act to publish the information indicated in 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and 
4(1)(c)
 on its website so that
       the public have minimum resort to the use of the 
RTI Act
 to obtain the information."



Furthermore, High Court of Delhi in the decision of 
General Manager Finance Air India Ltd & Anr
v. Virender Singh, LPA No.
 205/2012, Decided On: 16.07.2012 had held as under:




       "8. 
The RTI Act
, as per its preamble was enacted to enable the citizens to secure access to
       information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency and
       accountability in the working of every public authority. An informed citizenry and
       transparency of information have been spelled out as vital to democracy and to contain
       corruption and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities accountable to the governed.
       The said legislation is undoubtedly one of the most significant enactments of independent
       India and a landmark in governance. The spirit of the legislation is further evident from
       various provisions thereof which require public authorities to:



       A. Publish inter alia:



       i) the procedure followed in the decision making process;



       ii) the norms for the discharge of its functions;



       iii) rules, regulations, instructions manuals and records used by its employees in discharging
       of its functions;



       iv) the manner and execution of subsidy programmes including the amounts allocated and
       the details of beneficiaries of such programmes;



       v) the particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or authorizations granted. [see
       
Section 4(1) (b)
, (iii), (iv), (v); (xii) & (xiii)].



       B. Suo moto provide to the public at regular intervals as much information as possible [see
       
Section 4(2)
]."



The Commission further referred to the recent decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
matter of 
Ferani Hotels Private Limited vs. the State Information Commissioner, Greater
Mumbai & Others
 in Civil Appeal Nos. 9064-9065 of 2018 (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 32073-
32074/ 2015) dated 27.09.2018, wherein the Hon'ble Court has directed to disclose the building


                                                                                          Page 8 of 10

 plans, sanctioned plans, and details of commercial establishments in the public domain. The
relevant observations made in the decision are mentioned hereunder:




       "34. In the end, we would like to say that keeping in mind the provisions of RERA and
       their objective, the developer should mandatorily display at the site the sanction plan.
       The provision of sub-section (3) of 
Section 11
 of the RERA require the sanction
       plan/layout plans along with specifications, approved by the competent authority, to be
       displayed at the site or such other places, as may be specified by the Regulations made
       by the Authority. In our view, keeping in mind the ground reality of rampant violations
       and the consequences thereof, it is advisable to issue directions for display of such
       sanction plan/layout plans at the site, apart from any other manner provided by the
       Regulations made by the Authority. This aspect should be given appropriate publicity
       as part of enforcement of RERA."



DECISION:



Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by both the parties, and in the
light of aforesaid decision of the Commission and the Superior Courts, the Respondent is directed to
comply with the spirit of the aforesaid decision and provide a copy of the Trust Deed of the
"Chaldean Syrian Church of the East" along with the Broad Assessment of ITR's filed by the said
Church, to the Appellant within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt of this order as also to
place it in the public domain considering the larger public interest involved therein.



The Commission also instructs the Respondent Public Authority to convene periodic
conferences/seminars to sensitize, familiarize and educate the concerned officials about the
relevant provisions of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 for effective discharge of its duties and responsibilities.



The Appeal stands disposed with the above direction.



                                                                    (Bimal Julka) (िबमल जु का)
                                                      (Information Commissioner) (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत त)




(K.L. Das) (के .एल.दास)
(Dy. Registrar) (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26182598/ 
[email protected]

 दनांक / Date: 23.01.2020





                                                                                         Page 9 of 10

 Copy to:



   1. Mr. Sudhanshu Jha, Commissioner of Income-tax (Exemptions), O/o the Commissioner
      of Income-tax (Exemptions), 2nd Floor, San Juan Tower, Old Railway Station Road
      Kochi - 682018





                                                                          Page 10 of 10