[Cites 
3
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Himanshu Malhotra vs Delhi Police on 19 October, 2020


                                  के ीयसूचनाआयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                               बाबागंगनाथमाग, मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                           नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या / Second Appeal No. CIC/DEPOL/A/2018/163553

Shri Himanshu Malhotra                                           ... अपीलकता/Appellant
                                    VERSUS/बनाम

The PIO,                                                    ... ितवादीगण /Respondent
Delhi Police, O/o the ADCP/PIO,
Central District, Daryaganj, New Delhi

Date of Hearing                          :    15.10.2020
Date of Decision                         :    19.10.2020

Information Commissioner                 :    Shri Y. K. Sinha

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on                  :   06.06.2018
PIO replied on                            :   11.07.2018
First Appeal filed on                     :   28.07.2018
First Appellate Order on                  :   No Reply
2ndAppeal/complaint received on           :   22.10.2018

Information sought
 and background of the case:

The Appellant filed RTI application dated 06.06.2018 seeking information on 06
points:

    1. Kindly provide, the undersigned with a copy of the reply/ representation filed by
       the Smt. Baljinder Malhotra with all the accompanying documents.

    2. Kindly provide the undersigned with a copy of the reply/ representation filed by the
       Sh. Jaspal Singh Khurana with all the accompanying documents.

    3. Kindly provide the undersigned with a copy of the reply/ representation filed by
       Indian Overseas Bank with all the accompanying documents.

    4. Kindly provide the undersigned with copy of all the proceedings with regard to the
       above stated Complaint and replies thereto.

    5. Kindly inform the undersigned of the steps taken/ action taken in furtherance of
       the Complaint and replies thereto.

    6. Kindly provide copy of the note-sheets with respect to the steps taken/
       action taken on the receipt of the reply from Smt. Baljinder Malhotra, Sh.

       Jaspal Singh Khurana and Indian Overseas Bank.



                                                         (Queries reproduced verbatim)





                                                                                 Page 1 of 4

 In response to query nos. 01 to 03, the PIO/ADCP, Central District, Delhi Police
denied the information under Section 8(1)(g & j) of the 
RTI Act
 vide letter dated
11.07.2018. Further, the respondent enclosed a copy of the enquiry report in
response to query nos. 04 to 06.



Dissatisfied with the reply received from the PIO, the Appellant filed a First Appeal
dated 28.07.2018, which was not adjudicated by the First Appellate Authority.
Therefore, the Appellant approached the Commission with the instant Second
Appeal.

Facts emerging in Course of Hearing:



A written submission has been received from PIO, Central District, Delhi vide
letter dated 08.10.2020 wherein while reiterating the reply of the CPIO it was
stated that the First Appeal was decided vide order dated 04.09.2018

In order to ensure social distancing and prevent the spread of the pandemic,
COVID-19, audio hearings were scheduled after giving prior notice to both the
parties.



The Appellant and his representative Shri P.N. Upadhyay, Advocate participated
in the hearing on being contacted on their telephone. At the outset they requested
for physical hearing in the matter. However, the Commission informed them that
in view of the COVID-19 crisis physical hearings are not being held except in
exceptional circumstances and that the Commission did not find it necessary to
hold a physical hearing in the instant matter. Thereafter, explaining the
background of the matter, the Appellant's representative stated that the bank
account details of his client were disclosed by the bank (Indian Overseas Bank) to
his wife and father in law without his consent. He further stated that an RTI
application pertaining to the aforementioned issue was also filed before the Indian
Overseas Bank which did not disclose the information. Hence, he approached the
Commission against the same where an interim decision was pronounced since
the Respondent in the said matter was not prepared to argue. On being queried
regarding the details of the case filed before the Commission against Indian
Overseas Bank, the Appellant and his representative feigned ignorance. The said
details were not provided by the Appellant despite several attempts made by the
Commission subsequent to the hearing.



The Respondent is represented by Shri H.S.P. Singh, ACP, Karol Bagh through
audio conference. He stated that the enquiry report in the matter was already
disclosed to the Appellant who was informed that the complaint was dismissed
since the offences were non-cognizable. In the enquiry report it was also
mentioned that a dispute between the Appellant and his wife was already pending
before Shri Ravinder Dudeja, Principal Family Judge, Tis Hazari Court where the
Appellant could seek further action. The Respondent also stated that the





                                                                            Page 2 of 4

 Appellant could pursue the matter separately against the Bank since it is the
Bank that provided the statement to his wife. Hence, no police action was
required. The Respondent also stated that information pertaining to the
statements of Smt. Baljinder Malhotra and Sh. Jaspal Singh Khurana were not disclosed

u/s 8 (1) (g)
 and (j) of the 
RTI Act, 2005
.



Decision:



Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by both the
parties, the Commission observed that a suitable reply providing the outcome of
enquiry conducted on the complaint filed by the Appellant was provided by the
Respondent. The information pertaining to statements of third parties was
correctly cited as exempted by the Respondent as per the provisions of 
RTI Act,
2005
. 
In the context, the Commission referred to the decision of the Hon'ble High
Court of Delhi in the matter of 
Kamal Bhasin v. Radha Krishna Mathur and Ors.,
W.P.(C
) 7218/2016 dated 01.11.2017 wherein it was had held as under:




       "6. In the present case, the petitioner stands as a relator party as he is also
       one of the complainants. The petitioner is not seeking any personal
       information regarding respondent No. 3, but merely seeks to know the
       outcome of the complaint made by him and other such complaints. The PFC
       Officers Association had pointed out certain conduct which according to
       them was irregular and warranted disciplinary action; thus, they would be
       certainly entitled to know as to how their complaints have been treated and
       the results thereof.

       10.....can be considered as personal information that has no relationship
       with public interest or public activity. The activity of the Central Vigilance
       Department includes investigation and taking action in cases of corruption.

       Secondly, the complaint related to the allegations of misconduct and how
       these complaints were treated were clearly matter of public interest.
       11 In the circumstances, this Court directs the respondent to
       disclose to the petitioner as to what action had been taken pursuant
       to his complaint and other similar complaints made against the
       then CMD. The petitioner would not be entitled to any notings and
       deliberations of the Group of Officers or Disciplinary Authority but
       only information as to what action was taken in relation to the
       complaints in question."



                                                                             Page 3 of 4


 Thus, in the light of the aforementioned observations, no further intervention of
the Commission is warranted in the matter.



The instant Second Appeal stands disposed off accordingly.



                                                         Y. K. Sinha ( वाई. के . िस हा)
                                            Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )

Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणतस ािपत ित)

Ram Parkash Grover (राम काश ोवर)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26180514





                                                                             Page 4 of 4