[Cites 
6
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Pushkar Anand vs Ministry Of Mines on 11 July, 2020


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                              के ीय सूचना आयोग
                     Central Information Commission
                          बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                      Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                      नई िद ी, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं     ा / Second Appeal No. CIC/MINES/A/2018/630286

 Pushkar Anand                                           ... अपीलकता/Appellant

                                     VERSUS
                                      बनाम


 The CPIO, Ministry of Mines,                            ... ितवादी /Respondent
 Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:

 RTI : 14.06.2018             FA     : 18.06.2018        SA       : 03.09.2018
                                                         Hearing : 04.05.2020 &
 CPIO : 18.06.2018            FAO : 16.07.2018
                                                         06.07.2020

                                    ORDER



1.    The instant matter was earlier listed before the Commission on 04.05.2020
where the respondent had sought adjournment on the said date, as he wants some
more time to get acquainted with the case because he was unable to access relevant
papers from his office due to the lock-down on account of Covid-19.

2.    The matter is listed today for further hearing.



Hearing:

3.    The appellant attended the hearing through audio-call. The respondent, Shri
Venkatesh Iyer, CPIO attended the hearing through audio-call.



                                                                         Page 1 of 6


 4.    The written submissions of the appellant and the respondent are taken on
record.

5.    The appellant submitted that the second reply filed by the respondent dated
04.07.2020 has invoked 
Section 8(1)(b)
 of the RTI Act for denying the information
on Point No. 1 of the original request, which is distinct from the previous reply dated
18.06.2018, wherein there was no mention of 
Section 8(1)(b)
. The appellant further
stated that the information in the previous reply was denied on the ground of 
Section
8(1)(a)
 of the RTI Act. The appellant further stated that 
Section 8(1)(a)
 and 
8(1)(b)

of the RTI Act are not applicable in this case, and the reliance by the respondent on
the same is completely unfounded and unsustainable in law. 
Section 8(1)(b)
 of the
RTI Act allows withholding such 'information which has been expressly forbidden
to be published by any court of law or tribunal or the disclosure of which may
constitute contempt of court.' In the present case no such order has been made by
any arbitration tribunal expressly forbidding publication of the requested
information i.e. notice of arbitration.

6.    The respondent submitted that vide their reply dated 18.06.2018, they have
informed the appellant that the information sought by him is exempted from
disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(a)
 of the RTI Act. The respondent further submitted
that vide their letter dated 04.07.2020, they have furnished the information to the
appellant on point nos. 2 and 3 of his RTI application. They have further informed
the appellant that information sought on point no. 1 cannot be provided to him, as it
is exempted from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(b)
 of the RTI Act. The respondent
further apprised the Commission that the information sought in the application
pertains to the International Arbitration between Government of India and Ras-Al-
Khaimah Investment Authority (RAKIA), Government of UAE under the India
UAE Bilateral Investment Treaty. As per clause 11 of the Terms of Appointment of
the Arbitration Tribunal dated 01.11.2017: "11 Confidentiality (a) These arbitral
proceedings shall be held in private. (b) Unless the Parties expressly agree in writing

                                                                             Page 2 of 6

 to the contrary, all documents or evidence produced by another party in the
proceedings not otherwise in the public domain shall be confidential - save and to
the extent that disclosure may be required to a party or an Arbitrator by a legal duty
to protect or pursue a legal right or to recognize , enforce or challenge an award in
legal proceedings. (c) The duty of confidentiality referred to in paragraph (b) above
applies to the Arbitrators, the Parties, their counsel, witnesses and experts, and all
other persons involved in the arbitration...". Therefore, any party is not permitted to
disclose information related to this arbitration to third parties (without the consent
of the other party) unless it is required to make any disclosure under a specific legal
duty. A similar carve out also exists under 
Section 8(1)(b)
 of the RTI Act which
exempts disclosure of "information which has been expressly forbidden to be
published by any court of law or tribunal." The respondent submitted that arbitration
is due to alleged breach of a contract / agreement. The arbitration is still ongoing.

Article 7
 of the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor State
Arbitration also provides exemption from disclosure of confidential business
information.



Decision:

7.    The Commission, after hearing the submissions of both the parties and after
perusal of records, observes that the respondent has furnished information to the
appellant on point nos. 2 and 3 of his RTI application. However, the information was
denied to the appellant on point no. 1 of the RTI application. The respondent, in its
initial reply, has denied disclosure of information under 
Section 8(1)(a)
 of the RTI
Act, as the disclosure of information which would prejudicially affect the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security, strategic, scientific or economic
interests of the State, relation with foreign state or lead to incitement of an offence.
However, the respondent in the written submissions filed by him has taken a
different defense that the information sought on point no. 1 is exempted from

                                                                              Page 3 of 6

 disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(b)
 of the RTI Act. However, on query from the
Commission, the respondent apprised that there is no such court order which has
been expressly prohibited for disclosure of such information. Therefore, 
Section
8(1)(b)
 does not apply to the present case.

8.    The Commission has further noted that as per clause 11 of the Terms of
Appointment of the Arbitration Tribunal dated 01.11.2017, there is a confidentiality
clause by which no information related to arbitration can be disclosed to any third
party. Therefore, there is a non-disclosure clause in the said agreement which bars
the disclosure of information to any third party.

9.    The Commission observed that the information sought by the appellant on
point no. 1 of the RTI application is exempted from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(a)

of the RTI Act which reads as follows:-

"1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there shall be no obligation to
give any citizen,--

(a) information, disclosure of which would prejudicially affect the sovereignty and
integrity of India, the security, strategic, scientific or economic interests of the State,
relation with foreign State or lead to incitement of an offence." In the present case,
the economic interest of the State/relation with foreign state may be prejudicially
affected. Further, the arbitration proceedings are still on-going and at this stage, the
Commission could not find any reason to give direction for disclosure of
information.

10.   The Commission further referred to the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court
of India in the case of R.B.I. and Ors. V. Jayantilal N. Mistry and Ors, Transferred
Case (Civil) No. 91 of 2015 (Arising out of Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 707 of 2012
decided on 16.12.2015 had held as under:

          "76. But neither the Fundamental Rights nor the Right to Information have
          been provided in absolute terms. The fundamental rights guaranteed under
          
Article 19
 Clause 1(a) are restricted under 
Article 19
 clause 2 on the

                                                                                 Page 4 of 6

 grounds of national and societal interest. Similarly 
Section 8
, clause 1 of

Right to Information Act, 2005
, contains the exemption provisions where
right to information can be denied to public in the name of national security
and sovereignty, national economic interests, relations with foreign states
etc. Thus, not all the information that the Government generates will or
shall be given out to the public. It is true that gone are the days of closed
doors policy making and they are not acceptable also but it is equally true
that there are some information which if published or released publicly,
they might actually cause more harm than good to our national interest...
if not domestically it can make the national interests vulnerable
internationally and it is more so possible with the dividing line between
national and international boundaries getting blurred in this age of rapid
advancement of science and technology and global economy. It has to be
understood that rights can be enjoyed without any inhibition only when
they are nurtured within protective boundaries. Any excessive use of these
rights which may lead to tampering these boundaries will not further the
national interest. And when it comes to national economic interest,
disclosure of information about currency or exchange rates, interest rates,
taxes, the regulation or supervision of banking, insurance and other
financial institutions, proposals for expenditure or borrowing and foreign
investment could in some cases harm the national economy, particularly if
released prematurely. However, lower level economic and financial
information, like contracts and departmental budgets should not be
withheld under this exemption. This makes it necessary to think when or
at what stage an information is to be provided i.e., the appropriate time of
providing the information which will depend on nature of information
sought for and the consequences it will lead to after coming in public
domain."

                                                                   Page 5 of 6


 11.   No further intervention of the Commission is required in the matter.

12.   With the above observations, the appeal is disposed of.

13.   Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.




                                                             नीरज कुमार गु ता)
                                         Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरज          ता
                                                                सूचना आयु त)
                                      Information Commissioner (स         त

                                                      दनांक / Date     06.07.2020




Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स$ािपत ित)


S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),
(011-26105682)



Addresses of the parties:
1.    The CPIO,
      Ministry of Mines,
      Under Secretary & Nodal CPIO, RTI Cell,
      Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.

2.    Pushkar Anand,





                                                                             Page 6 of 6