[Cites 
24
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Padmini Vora vs Reserve Bank Of India on 30 May, 2022


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                             के   ीयसूचनाआयोग
                     Central Information Commission
                         बाबागंगनाथमाग ,मुिनरका
                      Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                      नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीयअपीलसं या/Second Appeal No.CIC/RBIND/A/2021/119333,
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/619045&CIC/RBIND/A/2021/615945

Trans Union Cibil Limited,                            ... अपीलकता /Appellant
Represented by Ms. Padmini Vora,
Mumbai

Equifax Credit Information
Services Pvt Ltd.,
Represented by Ms.Anisha
Agarwal, Mumbai

Experian Credit Information
Company Pvt. Limited,
Represented by Ms. Ami Parikh, Mumbai

                                   VERSUS
                                   बनाम
CPIO                                                     ... ितवादी/Respondent
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Supervision, Centre-1
World Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade Colaba
Mumbai-400005

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:-

                                                      SA      : 07-05-
                             FA : 29-10-2020,
RTI : 09-06-2020                                      2021, 21-04-2021 &
                             27-10-2020&03-11-2020
                                                      26-04-2021


                                                                 Page 1 of 17
                                                          Hearing: 21-06-2021,
                            FAO : 22-12-2020&
CPIO : 01-10-2020                                        04-06-2021, 01-06-
                            07-01-2021
                                                         2021 &24-05-2022

                                  ORDER



1.    The above said matters have been listed before the Commission for
hearing on 01.06.2021, 04.06.2021 &21.06.2021, wherein the Commission
made following observations:-



      "The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of
      the case, and perusal of records observes that the appellant has
      prayed for interim order restraining the CPIO/FAA from releasing
      the information sought in the RTI Application. In terms of the
      prayer, the second appeal is admitted and keeping in view the
      urgency, the operation of CPIO's reply and FAA's order is stayed
      till further orders."



2.     Inview of the above, the aforesaid matters were thus adjourned and listed
today for further hearing.Since, the cause of action has arisen from the same
RTI application and orders of CPIO and FAA, therefore all the above matters
are clubbed together in the interest of justice.



Hearing:



3.     Adv. Pradeep Bakhru (Counsel for the Appellant) along with the
appellant Ms. Padmini Vora attended the hearing through video-conferencing.
The respondent, Shri Vinod Kumar, Representative of CPIO/Deputy General
Manager attended the hearing through video-conferencing. The original RTI
applicant attended the hearing through video-conferencing.

4.     The written submissions of the parties are taken on record.

5.     The Counsel for the appellant has referred the reply provided by CPIO
and order passed by the FAA and submitted that the CPIO, RBI and FAA had
violated the principles of natural justice, as they had not given any personal
hearing to the Appellant before passing their decisions in the matter. No reasons

                                                                       Page 2 of 17

 were given for not offering personal hearing neither in CPIO's reply nor in
FAO. The appellant has filed the captioned Second Appeals challenging the
Order issued by the Ld. FAA, RBI as the Ld. FAA has failed to observed that
the applicant has sought disclosure of the said Inspection Reports which are
exempted under 
section 8
 of the RTI Act, 2005, more particularly 
section 8 (1)


(a), 
section 8 (1) (d)
 and 
section 8 (1) (j)
 inter alia since the contents of the said
Inspection Reports sought to be disclosed contains confidential information
pertaining to the Appellant, its customers as well as details of the Appellant's
commercial transactions and details regards to Appellant's regulatory
compliances, which bear no relation with public activity and/ or larger public
interest, and disclosure of the same would cause prejudice to the Appellant and
its competitive position in the market and will also affect customer's confidence
in the Appellant. The disclosure of information sought will be violative of

Article 14
 and 
Article 19 (1) (g)
 of the Constitution. 
The RTI Act
 was enacted
to increase the transparency and accountability in functioning of the public
authorities. 
The RTI Act
 does not apply to private entities such as the Appellant,
as the Appellant is not covered within the definition of "public authorities" as
defined under 
section 2 (h)
 of the RTI Act.

6.     Also the Counsel for the appellant has referred the Full Bench judgment
of this Hon'ble Commission passed in file no. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460&
Ors. vide order dated 05.05.2022 wherein an identical issue of disclosure of
Inspection Report, has remanded the matters to the CPIO for fresh adjudication
by keeping in mind principles of natural justice. Moreover, considering the fact
that several banks have filed inter alia Writ Petition No. 1159 of 2019 before
the Hon'ble Supreme Court inter-alia impugning the disclosure of their
Inspection Reports by RBI under the 
RTI Act
, this Hon'ble Commission has
also held that any decision by the CPIO in respect of disclosure of Inspection
Report would amount to pre-judging the issues pending the admitted Writ
Petition (s) before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.

7.     The Counsel for the Appellant further submitted that the CPIO & FAA
did not pass a reasoned order due to which the appellant could not be able to file
proper appeal. Hence, it has restricted their right to challenge the impugned



                                                                           Page 3 of 17

 order appropriately before the Commission on issues of facts or legal
infirmities.

8.     The representative of the Reserve Bank of India while presenting their
case inter alia submitted that the applicant, Shri Basant Soni, vide above RTI
applications inter alia, sought, copy of Audit/ Inspection Reports from year
2007-2019 etc. They further submitted that the then CPIO issued the notice
under 
Section 11(1)
 read with 
Section 11(2)
 of the Right to Information Act,
2005 
(RTI Act
) to the third party i.e. appellant informing that RBI was required
to disclose the information sought by Shri Basant Soni, enabling appellant to
make written submission within 10 days from the date of receipt of the notice as
to whether the information sought by the applicant might be disclosed or not
along with reasons for the same. After considering the response from Appellant,
the CPIO decided to disclose the detail of Audit/ Inspection Reports from year
2007-2019etc. to the applicant. He further submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in RBI vs. Jayantilal N. Mistry & Ors (2016) 3 SCC 525 observed that :-

       "RBI is clearly not in any fiduciary relationship with any bank. RBI
       ought to act with transparency and not hide information that might
       embarrass individual banks. It is duty bound to comply with the
       provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and disclose the information sought by the
       applicant."

The FAA duly considered the contentions of the appellant. FAA observed that
the interim order of the Supreme Court as quoted by the appellant was against
disclosure of inspection reports/ risk assessment reports etc. of banks including
State Bank of India and not of a credit information company like the appellant.
As such, it would not be possible for the appellant to take benefit of that order.
As regards, appellant's contention that it is not a public authority as defined in
the Act, FAA observed that RBI which holds information is a public authority.
RBI collects information from banks and other entities regulated by it, including
the appellant in exercise of its power under the relevant statute. Further due to
Covid-19 pandemic, their office was working with limited resources which
caused delay in providing reply/ issuing notice under 
section 11
 of RTI Act.

9.     The original applicant submitted that the respondent Reserve Bank of
India was duty bound to disclose the information sought by the applicant in his

                                                                       Page 4 of 17

 above RTI applications as per Jayantilal Mistry caseand in compliance of this
order should suo moto upload these reports under 
section 4 (1)
 of RTI Act. He
stated that the Reserve Bank of India was creator of reports and it acted as a
guardian of public interest. Therefore, as per the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme
Court of India dated 16.12.2015 and as per order dated 28.04.2021 complete
information should be disclosed to the RTI applicant. He stated that there was
no ambiguity in Jayantilal Mistry's case and there was a larger public interest
in disclosing the information. 
He has further referred para no. 96 of one
judgment passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in "
Namit Sharma vs.
Union of India
" wherein it was held that:-




      "This takes us to discuss the kind of duties and responsibilities that such
      high post is expected to perform. Their functions are adjudicatory in
      nature. They are required to give notice to the parties, offer them the
      opportunity of hearing and pass reasoned orders. The orders of the
      appellate authority and the Commission have to be supported by
      adequate reasoning as they grant relief to one party, despite opposition
      by the other or reject the request for information made in exercise of a
      statutory right."



Therefore, they have followed the mandate of Hon'ble Supreme Court's
judgment while passing the orders. Further he has contested the delay caused by
the CPIO while issuing notice under 
section 11
 of RTI Act as well as the FAA
while deciding the first appeal. Therefore there was an undue delay in
completing the proceedings on the part of CPIO and FAA. He also alleged that
the respondent is in connivance with the third party, therefore an unreasonable
delay has been caused.



Decision:

10. The Commission, after hearing the submissions of both the parties and
after perusal of records, observes that the original RTI applicant has sought
information regarding copy of Audit/ Inspection Reports from the year 2007 to
2019. Further, he has asked to publish these reports on the website of the RBI in
terms of judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of RBI vs.


                                                                       Page 5 of 17

 Jayantilal Mistry (
2016) (3) SCC (525) and Girish Mittal vs. Parvati
 vs.
Sundaram (2019 SCC Online SC 607).The CPIO, Reserve Bank of India had
issued notices under 
Section 11(1)
 and 
11(3)
 to the appellant intending to
disclose the information. Aggrieved by the decision of the CPIO, the appellant
had filed first appeal with the First Appellate Authority. The FAA had also
dismissed the first appeal of the appellant summarily.
 The Commission
observes that the RTI applicant had insisted for disclosure of information as per
Jayantilal N. Mistry's case and as per 
section 4 (1)
 of RTI Act. The Appellant
contested that the information sought as a whole is exempted from disclosure
under 
Section 8 (1) (a)
, 
Section 8(1) (d)
 and 
8(1) (j)
 of the RTI Act. Despite the
Appellant's specific requests, no opportunity of personal hearing was provided
in the matter. The Ld. FAA has erred in concluding that it was not necessary to
provide personal hearing in the matter. This is a clear violation of principles of
natural justice. He has further contended that the CPIO and FAA while passing
unreasoned order have denied the right of the appellant to file appeal on merits
pointing out their errors/ legal infirmities in rejecting their objections.

11. The contention of the original applicant is that although the CPIO and
FAA has passed a reasoned order and the mandate of Supreme Court's
judgment duly considered while passing the order in the above RTI
Applications, but on every stage whether issuing notice under 
section 11
 of the
RTI Act or taking decision on response filed to the notice under 
section 11
 of
the RTI Act, the CPIO did not adhere with the prescribed time limits as per the
provisions of the 
RTI Act
. Even FAA took unreasonably long time in deciding
the first appeal and suo moto instead of disclosing information gave extra 50
days' time to file second appeal and made a suggestion to take stay order on
disclosing the requested information from the appropriate forum. He has further
alleged that considerable delay has been caused by the respondent as they are in
connivance with the third party. In response, the RBI submitted that due to
Covid-19 pandemic, they were working with limited resources during that time;
still they have expeditiously decided the above RTI Applications. They had to
provide reasonable time to the appellant to file second appeal as per the
principles of Natural Justice. Therefore, they have provided reasoned and fair



                                                                       Page 6 of 17

 order while dealing with the above RTI Applications in view of Jayantilal
Mistry's case along with other judicial pronouncement of Supreme Court.

12. The Commission observes that it is already a settled position in Jayantilal
Mistry's case that RBI is not fiduciary in relationship with the banks and
financial institution irrespective of these being public or private entities. These
Credit Rating Financial Institutions take transactional, financial & operational
data of clients to analyze their functioning and rate them within the broad
framework. Hence, inspection/ audit reports of these institutions will reflect on
such data of clients viz. credit & repayment history, names and information of
their operational and financial transactions etc, entrusted by the clients to their
respective Credit Rating Financial Institutions which may get interspersed in
these reports and have to be examined in the light of para nos. 77 of the same
judgment and various other judicial pronouncements protecting right to privacy
and protection of commercial interests. Therefore, the CPIO, Reserve Bank of
India has rightly invited objections but not expressed his reasoned view that to
what extent he is agreeing or disagreeing by the objections of the Appellant
while sharing the proposed redacted report for disclosure in some cases. The
Commission is of the view that these reports are not a simple set of information
as inspection and audit report consists of data about client including their credit,
financial & operational transactions etc, its analysis, judgment and observations
on the data provided by the clients as well as of institutions on their functioning,
regulatory compliance, deficiencies and strengths, suggestions for course of
correction, penal action as per provisions of the law etc., and may be much more
which the Commission may not be in a position appreciate in toto at this stage.

13. The Commission further noted the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
Reserve Bank of India V/s Jayantilal N. Mistry case clarifies that the
functional relationship between a regulator and a regulated entity is not
fiduciary. On the other hand the relationship is based on a statutory obligation to
ensure operational discipline and support remedial framework. Hence its
observations, guidance, directions or remedial actions are an outcome of own
functioning based on the analysis of the data shared by the regulated entity.

14. Keeping in view the broader nature of business carried out between a
customer and the bank/ financial institution, the Commission takes note of the

                                                                         Page 7 of 17

 observations passed by the Supreme Court in 
Central Board Of Sec.
Education &Anr. vs Aditya Bandopadhyay&Ors
 [2011 (8) SCC 497] vide
order dated 09.08.2011 examined and explained the expression 'fiduciary
relationship', and have illustrated a few relationships where parties were
involved in an act of fiduciary capacity including 'customers' in the following
words:


       "20. The term `fiduciary' and `fiduciary relationship' refer to different
       capacities and relationship, involving a common duty or obligation. 20.1)
       Black's Law Dictionary (7th Edition, Page 640) defines `fiduciary
       relationship' thus:



      A relationship in which one person is under a duty to act for the benefit of
      the other on matters within the scope of the relationship. Fiduciary
      relationships - such as trustee-beneficiary, guardian-ward, agent-
      principal, and attorney-client - require the highest duty of care. Fiduciary
      relationships usually arise in one of four situations : (1) when one person
      places trust in the faithful integrity of another, who as a result gains
      superiority or influence over the first, (2) when one person assumes
      control and responsibility over another, (3) when one person has a duty
      to act for or give advice to another on matters falling within the scope of
      the relationship, or (4) when there is a specific relationship that has
      traditionally been recognized as involving fiduciary duties, as with a
      lawyer and a client or a stockbroker and a customer."



      "39. The term "fiduciary" refers to a person having a duty to act for the
      benefit of another, showing good faith and candour, where such other
      person reposes trust and special confidence in the person owing or
      discharging the duty. The term "fiduciary relationship" is used to
      describe a situation or transaction where one person (beneficiary) places
      complete confidence in another person (fiduciary) in regard to his affairs,
      business or transaction(s). The term also refers to a person who holds a
      thing in trust for another (beneficiary). The fiduciary is expected to act in
      confidence and for the benefit and advantage of the beneficiary, and use
      good faith and fairness in dealing with the beneficiary or the things

                                                                        Page 8 of 17

       belonging to the beneficiary. If the beneficiary has entrusted anything to
      the fiduciary, to hold the thing in trust or to execute certain acts in regard
      to or with reference to the entrusted thing, the fiduciary has to act in
      confidence and is expected not to disclose the thing or information to any
      third party."



While taking into consideration the fact that the customers give their financial
information even to the Credit Rating Institutions in confidence and with
complete faith that may not be divulged as a result of disclosure by others, the
following observations passed by the Supreme Court in 
Bihar Public Service
Commission v. Saiyed Hussain Abbas Rizwi and Anr.
[ (2012) 13 SCC 61]
may be relied upon:




      "The satisfaction has to be arrived at by the authorities objectively and
      the "consequences of such disclosure have to be weighed with regard to
      the circumstances of a given case. The decision has to be based on
      objective satisfaction recorded for ensuring that larger public interest
      outweighs unwarranted invasion of privacy or other factors stated in the
      provision. Certain matters, particularly in relation to appointment, are
      required to be dealt with great confidentiality. The information may come
      to knowledge of the authority as a result of disclosure by others who give
      that information in confidence and with complete faith, integrity and
      fidelity. Secrecy of such information shall be maintained, thus, bringing it
      within the ambit of fiduciary capacity. Similarly, there may be cases
      where the disclosure has no relationship to any public activity or interest
      or it may even cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of the individual.
      All these protections have to be given their due implementation as they
      spring from statutory exemptions. It is not a decision simpliciter between
      private interest and public interest. It is a matter where a constitutional
      protection is available to a person with regard to the right to privacy.
      Thus, the public interest has to be construed while keeping in mind the
      balance factor between right to privacy and right to information with the
      purpose sought to be achieved and the purpose that would be served in


                                                                         Page 9 of 17

       the larger public interest, particularly when both these rights emerge
      from the constitutional values under the Constitution of India."



As emphasized by the Supreme Court in the judgment of Central Public
Information Officer, Supreme Court of 
India vs. Subhash Chandra Agarwal

in its judgment dated 13.11.2019, right to privacy and right to information have
to be treated as co-equals and none can take precedence over the other, rather a
balance needs to be struck. The following observations may also be relied upon
in that regard:




      "42. Privacy, it is uniformly observed in K.S. Puttaswamy (supra), is
      essential for liberty and dignity. Therefore, individuals have the need to
      preserve an intrusion-free zone for their personality and family. This
      facilitates individual freedom. On the question of invasion of personal
      liberty, the main judgment has referred to a three-fold requirement in the
      form of - (i) legality, which postulates the existence of law (RTI Act in the
      present case); (ii) need, defined in terms of a legitimate State aim; and

      (iii) proportionality, which ensures a rational nexus between the objects
      and the means to be adopted to achieve them. The third requirement, we
      would observe, is achieved in the present case by 
Sections 8(1)(j)
 and 
11

      of the RTI Act and the RTI Act cannot be faulted on this ground. 
The RTI
      Act
 also defines the legitimate aim, that is a public interest in the
      dissemination of information which can be confidential or private (or
      held in a fiduciary relationship) when larger public interest or public
      interest in disclosure outweighs the protection or any possible harm or
      injury to the interest of the third party."



Further in 
K.S. Puttaswamy and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors.
 [(2017) 10
SCC 1], the Supreme Court observed as under:




      "623. An individual has a right to protect his reputation from being
      unfairly harmed and such protection of reputation needs to exist not only
      against falsehood but also certain truths. It cannot be said that a more
      accurate judgment about people can be facilitated by knowing private
      details about their lives - people judge us badly, they judge us in haste,

                                                                       Page 10 of 17

       they judge out of context, they judge without hearing the whole story and
      they judge with hypocrisy. Privacy lets people protect themselves from
      these troublesome judgments."



15.   In view of the above, the Commission is of the view that these judicial
pronouncements have to be factored while deliberating all the claims of the
applicant for complete disclosure which may include inadvertent disclosure of
financial, transactional and operational data of the clients of the Bank etc.
Further, in NareshTrehan vs Rakesh Kumar Gupta [W.P.(C) 85/2010 & CM
Nos.156/2010 & 5560/2011], the Delhi High Court made the following
observations:



      "...It is, thus, essential that information relating to business affairs,
      which is considered to be confidential by an assessee must remain so,
      unless it is necessary in larger public interest to disclose the same. If the
      nature of information is such that disclosure of which may have the
      propensity of harming one's competitive interests, it would not be
      necessary to specifically show as to how disclosure of such information
      would, in fact, harm the competitive interest of a third party. In order to
      test the applicability of 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the Act it is necessary to first
      and foremost determine the nature of information and if the nature of
      information is confidential information relating to the affairs of a private
      entity that is not obliged to be placed in public domain, then it is
      necessary to consider whether its disclosure can possibly have an adverse
      effect on third parties."



 
The Supreme Court while deciding upon issues relating to personal
information of an individual in terms of his income tax returns passed the
following observations in 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande v. Central
Information Commr.
 [(2013) 1 SCC 212] :




      "12. The petitioner herein sought for copies of all memos, show-cause
      notices and censure/punishment awarded to the third respondent from his
      employer and also details viz. movable and immovable properties and


                                                                       Page 11 of 17

       also the details of his investments, lending and borrowing from banks and
      other financial institutions. Further, he has also sought for the details of
      gifts stated to have been accepted by the third respondent, his family
      members and friends and relatives at the marriage of his son. The
      information mostly sought for finds a place in the income tax returns of
      the third respondent. The question that has come up for consideration is:

      whether the abovementioned information sought for qualifies to be
      "personal information" as defined in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI
      Act.



      13. We are in agreement with the CIC and the courts below that the
      details called for by the petitioner i.e. copies of all memos issued to
      the third respondent, show cause notices and orders of
      censure/punishment etc. are qualified to be personal information as
      defined in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act. The performance
      of an employee/officer in an organization is primarily a matter
      between the employee and the employer and normally those aspects
      are governed by the service rules which fall under the expression
      "personal information", the disclosure of which has no relationship
      to any public activity or public interest. On the other hand, the
      disclosure of which would cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of
      that individual. Of course, in a given case, if the Central Public
      Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer of the
      Appellate Authority is satisfied that the larger public interest
      justifies the disclosure of such information, appropriate orders
      could be passed but the petitioner cannot claim those details as a
      matter of right.

      14. The details disclosed by a person in his income tax returns are
      "personal information" which stand exempted from disclosure under
      clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, unless involves a larger
      public interest and the Central Public Information Officer or the
      State Public Information Officer or the Appellate Authority is
      satisfied that the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of
      such information."



The aforementioned observations make it clear that the data has been shared by
the individuals with the Income Tax Department which is seeking such

                                                                       Page 12 of 17

 information as a statutory authority but while analyzing and assessing their
income keeps this data secured in the fiduciary capacity and hence it is
protected from disclosure. It is applicable not only for individuals but for other
legal entities recognizable under 
Income Tax Act
. Further, it has been observed
that the information in the hands of public authority even in the discharge of
statutory obligations is protected under fiduciary relationship.



16. There are apparently two set of such information which have been shared
by the Credit Rating Institutions with the regulator under statutory obligation.
First is the information/data of clients relating to their business/commercial
operations, financial transactions, business and commercial strategy which is
shared by clients with financial institutions in full trust and confidence and is
held by them in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure under the 
RTI Act

in their hands. Second set is the information relating to business strategy,
decisions, transactions, other operational data etc. of financial institution which
may have bearing on their competitive position and also enjoys the exemption
from disclosure in their hands, even if it is a public authority or otherwise, under
the 
RTI Act
. The Commission is of the view that the exemption of disclosure of
certain information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of
financial institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in
good faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligations. This aspect
is not the ratio of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's judgment and
decision of the regulator to consider redacting such data/information while
disclosing the reports is to be aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts covering such aspects.

17. The Commission further observes that by passing such orders simplicitors
shows non-application of mind but also ensure that their orders are may not be
questioned further with specific facts and points of law. Rejection or acceptance
of the specific objections raised by them was not spelt out in the order which
have been passed without giving an opportunity of hearing to them.The
Commission further observes that the CPIO is at best free to take decisions on
disclosure of information as per provision of 
RTI Act, 2005
 giving a reasoned
orders on the objections filed. The CPIO while issuing notice under 
Section 11

of the RTI Act has given the opportunity to the Appellant to file their

                                                                        Page 13 of 17

 objections, if any, against disclosure of information sought but has not found it
necessary to give them an opportunity of hearing. While not doing so, the CPIO
has not passed any reasoned order covering his deliberations on their objections,
his understanding of law or jurisprudence in deciding specific objections, in
favor of disclosure etc. Order passed by the CPIO is cryptic, without any
reference to objections raised by the Appellant. Similarly, the FAA instead of
passing a speaking order has also given a cryptic orderto the Appellant. The
CPIO and the FAA are expected to apply their mind before issuing the order of
intent of disclosing the information. Further, no opportunity of personal hearing
was given to the appellant nor speaking order have been passed by FAA for not
giving opportunity of hearing or elaborating reasons for accepting /not
accepting their objections in his decision in the appeal. The Commission is of
the view that every objection should be dealt and rejected/accepted with a
reason and reasons for not giving opportunity of personal hearing should be
well reasoned too in view of wider implications.

18. The Commission observes that rightful claims of the RTI applicant has to
be adjudicated in the light of specific objections filed by the Institution, various
judicial pronouncements of Hon'ble Supreme Court and High Courts providing
guidance on such matters. Opportunity of hearing should necessarily be
provided and orders passed by the CPIO and the FAA otherwise if denied or not
given reasoned, speaking and clear. In the present case, order by CPIO should
enumerate the principles for disclosure or non-disclosure of audit/ inspection
reports or part thereof which may include personal information, commercially
sensitive information of clients or institution and hence specifically excluded
disclosures under various Acts, etc.

19. The Commission in this context refer to the judgment of the Hon'ble
Delhi High Court in decision in 
J P Aggarwal v. Union of India (WP (C
) no.
7232/2009 it has held that:


          "The PIO is expected to apply his / her mind, duly analyse the
          material before him / her and then either disclose the information
          sought or give grounds for non-disclosure."



                                                                        Page 14 of 17


            Furthermore, in OM No. 20/10/23/2007-IR dated 09.07.2009, while
           elaborating on the duties and responsibilities of the FAA, it was stated
           that:



           "3. Deciding appeals under the 
RTI Act
 is a quasi judicial function. It
           is, therefore, necessary that the appellate authority should see that the
           justice is not only done but it should also appear to have been done. In
           order to do so, the order passed by the appellate authority should be a
           speaking order giving justification for the decision arrived at.



           5..............................
The Act
 provides that the first appellate authority
           would be an officer senior in rank to the CPIO. Thus, the appellate
           authority, as per provisions of the Act, would be an officer in a
           commanding position vis a vis' the CPIO. Nevertheless, if, in any
           case, the CPIO does not implement the order passed by the appellate
           authority and the appellate authority feels that intervention of higher
           authority is required to get his order implemented, he should bring the
           matter to the notice of the officer in the public authority competent to
           take against the CPIO. Such competent officer shall take necessary
           action so as to ensure implementation of the 
RTI Act
. "

20. The Commission has also taken a detailed view in file nos.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 & Ors. dated 05.05.2022 wherein issues of
redaction, ratio of Jayantilal Mistry case and other related issues are discussed
in detail. Perusal of the relevant paragraphs in Jayantilal Mistry judgment make
it clear that the fundamental rights enshrined upon the citizens in form of right
to information are not absolute and that the right to information may not draw
precedence over right to privacy. Therefore, the Courts need to strike a balance
between the rights as well as protections guaranteed to a citizen under 
Article 19

of the Constitution. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held that the disclosure
of information relating to banks and financial institutions may be allowed taking
into account the circumstances and nature of information sought for and not in a
blanket manner. The Commission advised the CPIO to consider taking the
relevant references from the said order while deciding the cases.



                                                                                Page 15 of 17


 21. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of the
CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care
has to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making
reasoned order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and
later in the hands of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be
required to adjudicate such RTI applications in the light of the observations of
the Commission afresh. The Commission also expects that the CPIO will take
view on various objections filed by the Appellant and submissions made by
applicant to reach the decision in favor or against on case to case basis. He has
to factor the observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry case,
Commission's judgment dated 05.05.2022 and other relevant judgments, some
of which have been referred in this order as well. Hence, with these
observations the order passed by the CPIO and FAA in this matter is set aside
and the case is being remanded to the CPIO for adjudication afresh. The above
directions of the Commission should be complied within a period of 30 days
from the date of receipt of this order. In case, the appellant/applicant is
aggrieved with the order of the CPIO, they are at the liberty to file first appeal
before the First Appellate Authority and afterwards second appeal before the
Commission.

22. With the above observations, all the above appeals are hereby disposed
of.

23. Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.



                                                             नीरजकु मारगु ा)
                                         Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरजकु       ा
                                                                सूचनाआयु )
                                      Information Commissioner (सू

                                                        दनांक / Date : 27-05-2022
Authenticated true copy

(अिभ मािणतस यािपत ित)

S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा ),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),
(011-26105682)

                                                                      Page 16 of 17

 Addresses of the parties:

1.    CPIO
      Reserve Bank of India
      Department of Supervision, Centre-1
      World Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade Colaba
      Mumbai-400005

2.    Ms. Padmini Vora
      Trans Union Cibil Limited

3.    Ms. Anisha Agarwal
      Equifax Credit Information Services Pvt Ltd

4.    Ms. Ami Parikh
      Experian Credit Information Company Pvt. Ltd.

5.    Basant Kumar Soni
      (Original Applicant)





                                                      Page 17 of 17