[Cites 
8
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Rajesh Tiwari vs Planning Commission on 15 May, 2020


                                     के ीय सूचना आयोग
                            Central Information Commission
                                  बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                             Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                               नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या / Second Appeal No.:- CIC/NITIA/A/2018/154491-BJ

Mr. Rajesh Tiwari

                                                                      ....अपीलकता/Appellant
                                          VERSUS
                                           बनाम
CPIO,
Niti Aayog (Economics, Finance & Commerce Cell),
Sansad Marg, New Delhi - 110001

                                                                   ... ितवादीगण /Respondent
Date of Hearing      :              06.05.2020
Date of Decision     :              15.05.2020

Date of RTI application                                                 21.05.2018
CPIO's response                                                         21.06.2018
Date of the First Appeal                                                02.07.2018
First Appellate Authority's response                                    31.07.2018
Date of diarised receipt of Appeal by the Commission                    05.09.2018

                                         ORDER



FACTS
The Appellant vide his RTI application sought information regarding the copy of proposal for
disinvestment of Air India submitted by Niti Aayog, etc.
The CPIO, vide its letter dated 21.06.2018, denied disclosure of information under 
Section
8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. Dissatisfied by the response, the Appellant approached the FAA.
The FAA, vide its order dated 31.07.2018, upheld the CPIO's response.



HEARING:

Facts emerging during the hearing:

The following were present:

Appellant: Mr. Rajesh Tiwari through WhatsApp;

Respondent: Mr. Abhishek Mukherjee, Research Officer through WhatsApp;



                                                                                   Page 1 of 4


 The Appellant reiterated the contents of the RTI application and stated that the information
sought was wrongly denied by the CPIO/FAA under 
Section 8(1) (d)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. It
was further submitted that the Government is endeavoring to disinvest in Air India based on the
recommendations made by the Niti Aayog. Considering the fact that the larger public interest is
involved in the matter, it was emphasized that the public has a right to know the basis of arriving
at a decision to disinvest and therefore, he desired to have a copy of recommendation made by
the Public Authority. In its reply, the Respondent reiterated the replies of the CPIO/FAA and
stated that based on the draft cabinet note submitted by DIPAM, Niti Aayog had examined and
furnished its comments before placing the matter to the Cabinet. However, the final decision was
yet to be taken in the matter and therefore, they could not divulge the information at this stage.
The Respondent further referred to 
Section 8(1) (i)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 and stated that Cabinet
Papers also includes records of deliberations of the Council of Ministers, Secretaries and other
officers and the recommendations made is a part of the Cabinet Paper, hence, it could not be
disclosed. It was also informed that the decision taken by the Cabinet was available on the PIB
website. The Appellant contested the above averments of the Respondent and submitted that he
had only sought for the recommendations made by the Niti Aayog that had no relation to the
Cabinet Papers or the deliberations contained therein. The Appellant further submitted that the
Cabinet had taken its decision around two years ago. It was articulated that the operational
modalities of the implementation of the said decision were yet to be finalized.



The Commission referred to the definition of information
 u/s 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 which is
reproduced below:

       "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-
       mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, report,
       papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and information
       relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other
       law for the time being in force."

Furthermore, a reference can also be made to the relevant extract of 
Section 2 (j)
 of the RTI Act,
2005 which reads as under:

       "(j) right to information" means the right to information accessible under this Act which
       is held by or under the control of any public authority and includes ........"

In this context a reference was made to the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in 2011 (8) SCC
497 (
CBSE Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay
), wherein it was held as under:


       35..... "It is also not required to provide 'advice' or 'opinion' to an applicant, nor
       required to obtain and furnish any 'opinion' or 'advice' to an applicant. The reference to
       'opinion' or 'advice' in the definition of 'information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only
       refers to such material available in the records of the public authority. Many public
       authorities have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and opinion to
       the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused with any obligation
       under the 
RTI Act
."

Furthermore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Khanapuram Gandaiah Vs. Administrative
Officer and Ors. Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.34868 OF 2009 (Decided on January 4, 2010)
had held as under:



                                                                                        Page 2 of 4


        6. "....
Under the RTI Act
 "information" is defined under 
Section 2(f)
 which provides:

       "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-
       mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, report,
       papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and information
       relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other
       law for the time being in force."

       This definition shows that an applicant under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act can get any
       information which is already in existence and accessible to the public authority under
       law. Of course, under the 
RTI Act
 an applicant is entitled to get copy of the opinions,
       advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he cannot ask for any information as to why such
       opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc. have been passed."

       7. "....the Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material which is not
       before him; or any information he could have obtained under law. Under 
Section 6
 of
       the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such information which can be accessed
       by the "public authority" under any other law for the time being in force. The answers
       sought by the petitioner in the application could not have been with the public authority
       nor could he have had access to this information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged
       to give any reasons as to why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was
       before him."

In the context of non disclosure of information under 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, the
decision in 
Naresh Trehan vs Rakesh Kumar Gupta (W.P(C
) 85/2010) decided on 24.11.2014,
was referred to, wherein it was held as under:


       14. "....Such information would clearly disclose the pricing policy of the assessee and
       public disclosure of this information may clearly jeopardise the bargaining power
       available to the assessee since the data as to costs would be available to all agencies
       dealing with the assessee. It is, thus, essential that information relating to business
       affairs, which is considered to be confidential by an assessee must remain so, unless it is
       necessary in larger public interest to disclose the same. If the nature of information is
       such that disclosure of which may have the propensity of harming one's competitive
       interests, it would not be necessary to specifically show as to how disclosure of such
       information would, in fact, harm the competitive interest of a third party. In order to
       test the applicability of 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the Act it is necessary to first and foremost
       determine the nature of information and if the nature of information is confidential
       information relating to the affairs of a private entity that is not obliged to be placed in
       public domain, then it is necessary to consider whether its disclosure can possibly have
       an adverse effect on third parties."



                                                                                       Page 3 of 4


 DECISION:



Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by both the parties as also the
proviso contained in 
Section 8(1) (d)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 emphasizing that the decision of the
Government in the aforesaid matter is 'work in progress' and in the light of the decision of the
Superior Court, no further intervention of the Commission is required in the matter.



The Appeal stands disposed accordingly.



(The Order will be posted on the website of the Commission)




                                                               (Bimal Julka) (िबमल जु का)
                                        (Chief Information Commissioner) (मु य सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत त)




K.L. Das (के .एल.दास)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26186535/ 
[email protected]

 दनांक / Date: 15.05.2020





                                                                                     Page 4 of 4