[Cites 
12
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Venkatesh Nayak vs Directorate Of General Of Health ... on 5 June, 2020


                                     के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                           Central Information Commission
                                बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                            Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                                नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

िशकायत सं या / Complaint No.:- CIC/MOHFW/C/2020/668909-BJ +
                               CIC/DTGHS/C/2020/668913-BJ

Mr. Venkatesh Nayak
Email: 
[email protected]


                                                              .... िशकायतकता /Complainant

                                          VERSUS
                                            बनाम
1.    CPIO & CMO (EMR),
      Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,
      Directorate General of Health Services
      (Emergency Medical Relief),
      Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi - 110011

2.    CPIO & Professor -Covid 19,
      Nodal Officer, Deptt. of TB&CD,
      DGHS, Lady Hardinge Medical College
      & Smt. Sucheta Kriplani Hospital, New Delhi

3.    US & CPIO,
      Department of Health & Family Welfare,
      MOHFW, Nirman Bhawan,
      Maulana Azad Road, New Delhi - 110011

4.    CPIO, Nodal Officer,
      Indian Council of Medical Research,
      V. Ramalingaswami Bhawan,
      Ansari Nagar, New Delhi - 110029

5.    CPIO & Under Secretary,
      Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
      (Hospital-I Section), Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi

                                                                ... ितवादीगण /Respondent



                                                                             Page 1 of 13
 Date of Hearing       :             01.06.2020
Date of Decision      :             05.06.2020

                                         ORDER



RTI 1: CIC/MOHFW/C/2020/668909-BJ

Date of filing of RTI application                                     17.04.2020
CPIO's response                                                       18.04.2020/
                                                                      21.04.2020
Date of filing the First appeal                                       Not on record
First Appellate Authority's response                                  Not on record
Date of diarised receipt of Complaint by the Commission               24.04.2020

FACTS:



The Complainant vide his RTI application sought on 05 points regarding the district-wise
number of hospitals and healthcare facilities called by any other name, designated as COVID-19
treatment centers as on date; postal addresses and telephone numbers of the hospitals and
healthcare facilities and other issues related thereto.



The CPIO (D/o Health and Family Welfare) transferred the RTI application to the CPIO, ICMR
and CPIO, DGHS on 18.04.2020. As per the status report furnished by the Complainant, the RTI
application was subsequently transferred by the DGHS to the concerned CPIO (details not
available) on 21.04.2020. Dissatisfied by the response of the CPIO, the Complainant approached
the Commission.



RTI 2: CIC/DTGHS/C/2020/668913-BJ

Date of filing of RTI application                                     17.04.2020
CPIO's response                                                       18.04.2020/
                                                                      21.04.2020/
                                                                      30.04.2020/
                                                                      06.05.2020/
                                                                      12.05.2020
Date of filing the First appeal                                       Not on record
First Appellate Authority's response                                  Not on record
Date of diarised receipt of Complaint by the Commission               24.04.2020





                                                                                  Page 2 of 13

 FACTS:


The Complainant vide his RTI application sought on 05 points regarding the district-wise
number of hospitals and healthcare facilities called by any other name, designated as COVID-19
treatment centres as on date; postal addresses and telephone numbers of the hospitals and
healthcare facilities and other issues related thereto.



The CPIO (D/o Health and Family Welfare) transferred the RTI application to the CPIO, ICMR
and CPIO, DGHS on 18.04.2020. As per the status report furnished by the Complainant, the RTI
application was subsequently transferred by the DGHS to the concerned CPIO (details not
available) on 21.04.2020. The CPIO and CMO, EMR, DGHS vide letter dated 30.04.2020,
informed the Complainant that the information is not available in EMR Division and that the
questions pertains to National Health Mission (NHM) and Hospital Division of MoHFW. The
CPIO and US, Hospital-I Division vide its letter dated 06.05.2020 transferred the RTI application
to the CPIO, Safdarjung Hospital, CPIO, Dr. RML Hospital and CPIO, LHMC and Associated
Hospital, New Delhi. Thereafter, the CPIO/ Nodal Officer- COVID-19 and Professor, LHMC,
Hospital, New Delhi vide its letter dated 12.05.2020 provided a point wise response to the
Complainant informing him that the District wise information was not available with the institute
and as far as Central Government Hospitals were concerned the same could be seen on
www.mohfw.gov.in and that LHMC was one of the COVID 19 Treatment Centre. Dissatisfied
by the response of the CPIO, the Complainant approached the Commission. Subsequently, the
CPIO, SNA Section, M/o HFW vide letter dated 21.05.2020, informed the Complainant that as
per record available in SNA (IEC) Section, none of the points mentioned in the RTI application
were dealt in their Section.



Vide email dated 24.04.2020, the Complainant informed the Commission regarding the
acknowledgement of the instant Complaint through online facility and requested to place the
matter before the CIC for an urgent and out of turn hearing based on the prayers and grounds
contained in the Complaint. With the approval of the CIC, the Dy. Registrar (CIC) vide notice of
hearing dated 18.05.2020 fixed 01.06.2020 as the date of hearing in the instant matters.



HEARING:

Facts emerging during the hearing:

The following were present:

Complainant: Mr. Venkatesh Nayak through WhatsApp;

Respondent: Dr. Sandeep Sharma, CPIO (SJH), Mr. Mahesh Mangla, CAPIO, SJH,
Dr. R. Laxmi Narayan, ADG, ICMR,       Dr. Ashok Kr. Singh, Prof. Chest Med. LHMC,
Dr. U. B. Das, CMO, DGHS in person; Mr. Rajender Kumar, US, PH Division, M/o H&FW
and Mr. G. P. Samanta, CPIO & US (Hospital-D) (SJH, RML and LHMC)through WhatsApp /
TC;



                                                                                     Page 3 of 13


 The Complainant re-iterated the contents of the RTI application and stated that essentially he was
seeking the district wise details of the hospitals and healthcare facilities designated as COVID-19
treatment centers; criteria for designating them as COVID-19 treatment centers; hospitals and
healthcare facilities whose status as COVID 19 treatment centers was withdrawn, etc which
should be available with the M/o Health and Family Welfare (M/oH&FW), Directorate General
of Health Services (DGHS) or the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). Explaining that
the information sought was in the larger public interest directly pertaining to the COVID-19
pandemic situation, the Complainant submitted that the suo motu disclosure of information
would immensely benefit the suspected COVID-19 patients or their relatives to be informed and
take timely action to approach the appropriate healthcare facility for treatment. Similarly, a non-
COVID-19 patient in the interest of his/ her safety and to receive urgent medical attention could
avoid approaching the hospitals/ healthcare centers designated as COVID-19 treatment centers.
The Complainant submitted that the since the consolidated district wise information of COVID-
19 treatment centers was not available in the public domain or the website of the M/oH&FW,
DGHS, ICMR, etc he was constrained to file an RTI application and subsequently the instant
Complaint since it is a matter pertaining to life and liberty of citizens. During the hearing, the
Complainant also made reference to para 8 and 9 of his additional written submission dated
20.05.2020 to submit that in the write up published on the PIB website on 05.05.2020 authored
by the Hon'ble Union Minister of Environment, Forest & Climate Change -Information &
Broadcasting; & Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, it was inter alia specifically quoted that
"Today, we have nearly 700 dedicated COVID Hospitals". Similarly, the M/oH&FW on
13.05.2020 posted a press note containing the gist of discussions held by the Union Minister for
Health and Family Welfare with the Government of Punjab to review its preparedness and
containment measures taken for COVID-19 Management wherein it was inter alia mentioned
that "The Union Minister stated that as of now 900 dedicated COVID hospitals with 1,79,882
beds (Isolation beds- 1,60,610 and ICU beds- 19,272) and 2,040 dedicated COVID Health
Centres with 1,29,689 beds (Isolation beds- 1,19,340 and ICU beds- 10,349) along with 8,708
quarantine centres and 5,577 COVID Care Centres with 4,93,101 beds are now available to
combat COVID-19 in the country" . Thus, while referring to the above press releases, the
Complainant submitted that a consolidated district wise data ought to have been maintained by
the Ministry officials based on which the aforementioned statements were made. He further cited
the example of mapping of designated COVID testing centers by the ICMR on Google Maps and
stated that similarly information regarding COVID-19 Treatment Centers could also be displayed
on Google Maps which would be beneficial to the entire citizenry. Thus, the Complainant prayed
for directing the Respondent to suo motu disclose the information sought in his RTI application
on their website and widely publicize the same through other modes of communication at the
earliest.



In its reply, the Respondent (M/oH&FW, PH Section) re-iterated the response to the RTI
application and their written submission and stated that the information sought was not available
with them and the application was transferred to the concerned CPIOs which was also
communicated to the Complainant vide letter dated 30.04.2020. The Respondent (CPIO and
CMO (EMR) DGHS) also stated that the information sought was not available with them and
was possibly available with the National Health Mission (NHM) and Hospital Division of
M/oH&HW hence the same was transferred to them vide letter dated 30.04.2020. The



                                                                                       Page 4 of 13

 Respondent (Hospital-I, Division, M/o H&FW) stated that since they were only dealing with the
03 Central Government Hospitals in Delhi i.e., Lady Hardinge Medical College (LHMC);
Dr. Ram Manohar Lohiya (RML) Hospital and Safdarjung Hospital, the application was
transferred to the respective hospitals. The representative of LHMC present during the hearing
referred to their reply sent to the Complainant dated 12.05.2020 and submitted that the District
wise information was not available with the institute and as far as Central Government Hospitals
were concerned the same could be seen on www.mohfw.gov.in and that LHMC was one of the
COVID 19 Treatment Centres. The representative of Safdarjung Hospital present during the
hearing also stated that although the Safdarjung Hospital is one of the COVID 19 Treatment
Centres, the district wise information was not available with them. The representative from
ICMR stated that they were only mandated to maintain COVID- Testing Centre data with them
and information regarding the treatment centers could be obtained from the DGHS hence they
had transferred the application to them which was also informed to the Complainant vide email
dated 22.05.2020. On being queried by the Commission regarding the concerned Nodal
Authority in M/o H&W/ DGHS/ ICMR responsible for maintaining and updating the
consolidated district wise data of COVID-19 treatment centers, no satisfactory response was
offered by any of the Respondents. It was noted by the Commission that officers from the M/o
H&FW/ DGHS/ ICMR who ought to be the concerned Public Authorities having the
consolidated data appeared totally clueless and tossed the responsibility of record keeping in the
present instance from one Public Authority to another.



The Commission was in receipt of a written submission from the Complainant dated 13.05.2020
wherein it was stated that he was of the firm belief that the PIO, Lady Hardinge Medical College
was not likely to have the information hence he did not wish to press for making him or Lady
Hardinge Medical College, a party to the instant Complaint Case.



The Commission was in receipt of an additional written submission from the Complainant dated
20.05.2020 wherein at the outset he clarified that the subject matter of both Complaints and the
information sought in the related RTI application are one and the same. Therefore he requested
that both cases be treated as a Complaint relating to one and the same matter during the hearing.
Thereafter, the Complainant while apprising the Commission of the developments subsequent to
20.04.2020 stated that on 30.04.2020 the CPIO of the Directorate General of Health Services to
whom the instant RTI application stood transferred, sent a reply stating that it was being
transferred to the CPIO, National Health Mission and Hospital Division of the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare (MoHFW) under 
Section 6(3)
 of the RTI Act. The said reply was submitted
to the Commission as a Link Paper. The Complainant submitted that it was his belief that the
said reply is perfunctory in nature and is designed by DGHS to wash its hands off the
instant RTI matter. Thereafter, on 06/05/2020, the CPIO of Hospital-I Section of the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare, transferred the instant RTI application to the CPIOs of Safdarjung
Hospital, Dr. RML Hospital and LHMC and Associated Hospital under 
Section 6(3)
 of the RTI
Act. The said communication was also submitted to the Commission as a Link Paper. The
Complainant submitted that the said reply was also perfunctory in nature and was
intended for MoHFW to wash its hands off the instant RTI matter. Subsequently, while
referring to the reply of the CPIO of LHMC & Associated Hospital dated 12/05/2020 and its
receipt by the Commission as also his email communication sent by him to the Commission, the



                                                                                      Page 5 of 13

 Complainant submitted that he did not wish to press for making LHMC and Associated Hospital
as a party to this Complaint as the said CPIO is not likely to have any of the information sought
in the instant RTI application. The Complainant further stated that after the submission of the
instant Complaint to the Commission, he came across at least two official press notes regarding
the actual number of hospitals and health care facilities that had been designated for the purpose
of COVID-19 treatment. Firstly, on 05/05/2020, the Press Information Bureau (PIB), published
on its website a write-up authored by the Hon'ble Union Minister of Environment, Forest &
Climate Change -Information & Broadcasting; & Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, Shri
Prakash Javadekar wherein the following was mentioned in the First Bullet Point: "There was no
concept of dedicated COVID hospitals. Today, we have nearly 700 dedicated COVID hospitals
with 2 lakh plus isolation beds and 15,000 ICU beds."(emphasis supplied). The extract from the
said write-up cited above clearly indicated that not only the Respondent Public Authorities but
also other Ministries and departments have access to information about the number of hospitals
that have been designated as COVID-19 treatment centres. The number of hospitals cited in the
aforementioned extract also pre-supposes the existence of a list of such centres, without which
arriving at such aggregate number would not have been possible. So the actions of the
Respondent Public Authorities in transferring the instant RTI application were difficult to
comprehend. The said Respondent Public Authorities being frontline agencies in the Central
Government's campaign to contain COVID-19, ought to have disclosed the information sought
in the instant RTI application, suo motu on an official website in the first place. Instead they
have tried to wash off their hands of the responsibility of proactive information disclosure by
transferring the instant RTI application to multiple public authorities, some of whom are not
likely to hold such information in their custody. Secondly, on 13/05/2020, the MoHFW posted a
Press Note containing the gist of the discussions held by the Hon'ble Union Minister for Health
and Family Welfare, Dr. Harsh Vardhan with the Government of Punjab to review its
preparedness and containment measures taken for COVID-19 Management. At para #3 of the
said Press Note the number of healthcare facilities designated for the purpose of COVID-19
treatment is mentioned. The relevant extract is reproduced ad literatim below: "The Union
Minister stated that as of now 900 dedicated COVID hospitals with 1,79,882 beds (Isolation
beds- 1,60,610 and ICU beds- 19,272) and 2,040 dedicated COVID Health Centres with
1,29,689 beds (Isolation beds- 1,19,340 and ICU beds- 10,349) along with 8,708 quarantine
centres and 5,577 COVID Care Centres with 4,93,101 beds are now available to combat
COVID-19 in the country." (emphasis supplied). Given the above extract, it was clear that
between 05 May when the Hon'ble Union Minister of Environment, Forest & Climate Change;
Information & Broadcasting; & Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, publicised a figure of
700 COVID-19 hospitals and 13 May, 2020 when the Hon'ble Union Minister for Health and
Family Welfare mentioned the much larger figures, the number of such treatment facilities has
grown. The statements of both Ministers presuppose the existence of a list of such hospitals and
treatments centres in the custody of the M/o Health and Family Welfare. But for such a list, the
Hon'ble Ministers would not have been able to mention the aggregate figures in their writings
and discussions. There is no reason why the list of such hospitals and treatment centres cannot be
made public suo motu under 
Section 4(1)(b)
 of the RTI Act. Further, after the submission of the
instant Complaint to the Commission, he had been able to locate a unique information resource
relating to COVID-19 Testing Centres on the website of ICMR. The ICMR has mapped all
designated COVID-19 testing centres on a Google Map and made it accessible to any person



                                                                                      Page 6 of 13

 sitting in any corner in the world at the click of a button. The said Google Map based plotting of
COVID-19 Testing centres was accessible at: https://covid.icmr.org.in/index.php/testing-
facilities. Given the degree of transparency about testing centres which have an important role to
play prior to the hospitalisation of the infected person, as and when required, there was no reason
why a similar list of designated COVID-19 hospitals and treatment centres could not be made
public under the 
RTI Act
. As none of the Respondent Public Authorities have taken such action,
he felt constrained to seek such information formally, under the 
RTI Act
. Further a perusal of the
last para of the instant RTI application clearly indicated that he did not seek the said information
for himself. Instead he sought access to such information in a manner that would facilitate access
to all citizens and organisations in the country. None of the CPIOs of the Respondent Public
Authorities had applied their mind to these matters while acting on the instant RTI application.
Their attempts to wash their hands off the matter were clearly evident from their perfunctory
replies. Therefore he felt constrained to approach the Commission with this Complaint to
seek a direction for proactive disclosure of all the information sought in the instant RTI
application. Further, he sought the leave of the Commission to submit public interest grounds
supporting the demand for making the names of hospitals and healthcare facilities designated for
the purpose of COVID-19 treatment available in the public domain. Firstly, he was aware of
news reports of patients suspected of COVID-19 infection being turned away by hospital after
hospital refusing treatment on one pretext of the other, as a result of which deaths occurred. A
reference was made to one such news report published in The Hindu in 03/05/2020 accessible at
this link: https://english.manoramaonline.com/news/nation/2020/05/03/keralite-dies-after-5-
mumbai hospitals-refuse-treatment-over-cov.html. A 55-year old ailing Keralite is said to have
died after five hospitals turned him away as they suspected it to be a case of COVID-19
infection. Had a consolidated list of COVID-19 hospitals been made available on the Internet
and widely publicised by the Respondent Public Authorities, the family of this victim of medical
neglect would have been able to pinpoint the designated COVID-19 treatment hospitals and ferry
him to one of them without having to visit other hospitals. Secondly, there were also reports of
designated COVID-19 hospitals turning away patients ailing from non-COVID illnesses as a
result of which they died without receiving urgent medical attention. In this context a reference
was made to a media report of the incident published in The Hindu on 25/04/2020 at:

https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/mumbai/woman-dies-after-shuttlingbetween
hospitals/article31428548.ece. Had the district-wise list of COVID-19 treatment centres been
made available in a consolidated form with State and district-wise facility on an official website
and publicised its existence widely, the family of this victim would have had adequate access to
information to visit hospitals that had not been designated as COVID-19 treatment centres
promptly instead of wasting time by driving her to one such designated COVID-19 hospital.
Thus it was submitted that the disclosure of the information is of immense public interest and
that the Respondent Public Authorities do not seem to have paid adequate attention to this
dimension and implication of the instant RTI application while transferring it from one public
authority to another. Furthermore, media reports indicate that certain healthcare facilities that
were designated as COVID-19 treatment centres have subsequently been divested of such a role.
He was familiar with at least one media report where a prominent hospital in Delhi was removed
from the list of COVID-19 designated treatment centres. This news report published by The New
Indian         Express         on         09/04/2020         may        be        accessed        at:

https://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/delhi/2020/apr/09/gb-pant-hospital-removedfrom- list



                                                                                         Page 7 of 13

 of-designated-covid-19-facilities-delhi-govt-order-2127863.html. While stating that he had
sought access to the names of such hospitals that had been so divested and reasons for the same
at paras #4-5 of the instant RTI application the Complainant submitted that there was no reason
why such information could not be placed in the public domain officially by the Respondent
Public Authorities. As none of the Respondent Public Authorities had voluntarily placed such
information in the public domain, he felt constrained to formally seek access to such information.
None of the CPIOs of the Respondent Public Authorities have applied their mind to these matters
while acting on the instant RTI application. Their perfunctory replies and attempts to wash their
hands off the matter are clearly evident. Therefore he felt constrained to move this Hon'ble
Commission with this Complaint to seek a direction for proactive disclosure of all the
information sought in the instant RTI application. The Complainant inter alia affirmed that he
had transmitted a copy of this Complaint along with Annexures to the CPIOs of all the
Respondent Public Authorities, by email.



The Commission was also in receipt of a written submission from the Respondent CPIO and US/
PH Division, M/o Health and Family Welfare dated 30.04.2020 wherein it was stated that in so
far as their division was concerned the information sought was not available with them which
was also communicated to the Complainant through the online portal on 30.04.2020. The
representatives of the M/o H&FW feigned ignorance of the facts stated by the Ministers in their
briefing as mentioned above.



The Commission was also in receipt of a written submission from the Respondent CPIO and
CMO (EMR), DGHS dated 05.05.2020 wherein it was inter alia stated that vide letter dated
30.04.2020 they had informed the Complainant that the information sought was not available
with the EMR Division hence the application was transferred to the NHM and Hospital Division
of MoHFW.



The Commission was also in receipt of a written submission from the Respondent ICMR through
email dated 26.05.2020 wherein it was inter alia stated that the reply of ICMR had already been
uploaded in the RTI website on 22/5/2020 and that information requested was not pertaining to
ICMR, and was closely related to Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS), Deptt. of
Health and Family Welfare, Hence, RTI application hence the same is being transferred to
DGHS under 
section 6(3)
 of RTI to Information Act, 2005.



The Commission was also in receipt of a copy of the written submission of Nodal CPIO, Dr.
RML Hospital, New Delhi dated 30.05.2020 wherein it was stated that the reply to the RTI had
been given to the Complainant on 14.05.2020 and that as per the CIC notice, Dr RML Hospital
was not a party in the said matter.



Having heard all the parties and on perusal of the available records, the Commission at the outset
was appalled to learn that basic information pertaining to the District Wise Designated COVID
treatment centres could not be provided to the information seeker by any of the Respondents. As
per the provisions of the 
RTI Act, 2005
, the CPIO acts as the pivot for enforcing the
implementation of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 and it is their responsibility to facilitate flow of information
instead of simply shifting the onus of disclosing the same to other Public Authority/ officials. In



                                                                                        Page 8 of 13

 the present instance none of the Respondent disclosed the information or made an effort to assist
the information seeker in obtaining the information on a very sensitive matter which certainly
pertains to the interest of the public at large. 
In this context, the Commission referred to the
decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in 
J P Aggarwal v. Union of India (WP (C
) no.
7232/2009 wherein on the issue of the duties and responsibilities of the CPIO, it was held that:




       " 7"it is the PIO to whom the application is submitted and it is who is responsible for
       ensuring that the information as sought is provided to the applicant within the
       statutory requirements of the Act. 
Section 5(4)
 is simply to strengthen the authority of
       the PIO within the department; if the PIO finds a default by those from whom he has
       sought information. The PIO is expected to recommend a remedial action to be taken".

 
The RTI Act
 makes the PIO the pivot for enforcing the implementation of the Act."



       8.............The PIO is expected to apply his / her mind, duly analyse the material before
       him / her and then either disclose the information sought or give grounds for non-
       disclosure."



The Commission further observed that the 
RTI Act, 2005
 stipulates time limits in its various
provisions relating to responding to RTI Applications, transfer of applications, filing and
disposing of first appeal to ensure that a culture of information dissemination is strengthened so
that a robust functioning of the democracy gets established. This was recognised by the Hon'ble
High Court of Delhi in 
Mujibur Rehman vs Central Information Commission (W.P. (C
)
3845/2007)(Dated 28 April, 2009) wherein it was held as under:




       "14.......The court cannot be unmindful of the circumstances under which the Act was
       framed, and brought into force. It seeks to foster an "openness culture" among state
       agencies, and a wider section of "public authorities" whose actions have a significant or
       lasting impact on the people and their lives. Information seekers are to be furnished
       what they ask for, unless the Act prohibits disclosure; they are not to be driven away
       through sheer inaction or filibustering tactics of the public authorities or their officers.
       It is to ensure these ends that time limits have been prescribed, in absolute terms, as
       well as penalty provisions. These are meant to ensure a culture of information
       disclosure so necessary for a robust and functioning democracy."



Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of R.K. Jain vs Union of India, LPA
No. 369/2018, dated 29.08.2018, held as under:



"9................................ That apart, the CPIO being custodian of the information or the
documents sought for, is primarily responsible under the scheme of the 
RTI Act
 to supply the
information and in case of default or dereliction on his part, the penal action is to be invoked
against him only."



The Commission also noted that it should be the endeavour of the CPIO to ensure that maximum
assistance should be provided to the RTI applicants to ensure the flow of information. In this
context, the Commission referred to the OM No.4/9/2008-IR dated 24.06.2008 issued by the


                                                                                       Page 9 of 13

 DoP&T on the Subject "Courteous behavior with the persons seeking information under the 
RTI
Act, 2005
" wherein it was stated as under:



       "The undersigned is directed to say that the responsibility of a public authority and its
       public information officers (PIO) is not confined to furnish information but also to
       provide necessary help to the information seeker, wherever necessary."



The Commission also referred to the OM No. 1/32/2007-IR dated 14.11.2007 wherein while
prescribing for creation of a nodal authority for dealing with RTI applications, it was stated as
under:



       "It is, therefore, requested that all public authorities with more than one PIO should
       create a central point within the organisation where all the RTI applications and the
       appeals addressed to the First Appellate Authorities may be received. An officer should
       be made responsible to ensure that all the RTI applications/ appeals received at the
       central point are sent to the concerned Public Information Officers/ Appellate
       Authorities, on the same day. For instance, the RTI applications/ appeals may be
       received in the Receipt and Issue Section/ Central Registry Section of the Ministry/
       Department/ Organisation/ Agency and distributed to the concerned PIOs/ Appellate
       Authorities. The R&I/CR Section may maintain a separate register for the purpose. The
       Officer-in-charge/ Branch Officer of the Section may ensure that the applications/
       appeals received are distributed the same day."



The Commission further observed that the information sought ought to have been suo motu
disclosed on the website of the Public Authority at the outset so as to obviate the necessity for an
information seeker to obtain the same through an RTI application. In this context, the
Commission observed that a voluntary disclosure of all information that ought to be displayed in
the public domain should be the rule and members of public who having to seek information
should be an exception. An open government, which is the cherished objective of the 
RTI Act
,
can be realised only if all public offices comply with proactive disclosure norms. 
Section 4(2)
 of
the RTI Act mandates every public authority to provide as much information suo-motu to the
public at regular intervals through various means of communications, including the Internet, so
that the public need not resort to the use of 
RTI Act
.

The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of 
CBSE and Anr. Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay
and Ors
 2011 (8) SCC 497 held as under:


       "37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and right to information
       are intended to be formidable tools in the hands of responsible citizens to fight corruption
       and to bring in transparency and accountability. The provisions of 
RTI Act
 should be
       enforced strictly and all efforts should be made to bring to light the necessary
       information under Clause (b) of 
Section 4(1)
 of the Act which relates to securing
       transparency and accountability in the working of public authorities and in discouraging
       corruption."



                                                                                       Page 10 of 13


 The Commission also observes the Hon'ble Delhi High Court ruling in WP (C) 12714/2009
Delhi Development Authority v. Central Information Commission and Another (delivered on:

21.05.2010), wherein it was held as under:

       "16.It also provides that the information should be easily accessible and to the extent possible
       should be in electronic format with the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public
       Information Officer, as the case may be. The word disseminate has also been defined in the
       explanation to mean - making the information known or communicating the information to the
       public through notice boards, newspapers, public announcements, media broadcasts, the internet,
       etc. It is, therefore, clear from a plain reading of 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act that the information,
       which a public authority is obliged to publish under the said section should be made available to
       the public and specifically through the internet. There is no denying that the petitioner is duty
       bound by virtue of the provisions of 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act to publish the information indicated
       in 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and 
4(1)(c)
 on its website so that the public have minimum resort to the use of
       the 
RTI Act
 to obtain the information."



Furthermore, High Court of Delhi in the decision of 
General Manager Finance Air India Ltd &
Anr v. Virender Singh, LPA No.
 205/2012, Decided On: 16.07.2012 had held as under:


       "8. 
The RTI Act
, as per its preamble was enacted to enable the citizens to secure access
       to information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency
       and accountability in the working of every public authority. An informed citizenry and
       transparency of information have been spelled out as vital to democracy and to contain
       corruption and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities accountable to the
       governed. The said legislation is undoubtedly one of the most significant enactments of
       independent India and a landmark in governance. The spirit of the legislation is further
       evident from various provisions thereof which require public authorities to:

       A. Publish inter alia:

       i) the procedure followed in the decision making process;

       ii) the norms for the discharge of its functions;

       iii) rules, regulations, instructions manuals and records used by its employees in
       discharging of its functions;

       iv) the manner and execution of subsidy programmes including the amounts allocated
       and the details of beneficiaries of such programmes;

       v) the particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or authorizations granted. [see
       
Section 4(1) (b)
, (iii), (iv), (v); (xii) & (xiii)].

       B. Suo moto provide to the public at regular intervals as much information as possible
       [see 
Section 4(2)
]."



It was observed by the Commission that important decisions are being made by the
Governments involving huge interventions in the healthcare and daily lives of billions of
people as they seek to secure social, economic and cultural wellbeing of its population and


                                                                                            Page 11 of 13

 uphold the rule of law. It is essential that the decisions themselves and the senior decision
makers involved are thoroughly documented in order for the Governments to remain
accountable both during and after the crisis for future generations to be able to learn from
these actions.



DECISION
It is well recognized that the impact of COVID-19 pandemic will be far reaching and that all the
stakeholders need to be cognizant of the importance of proper data and record management.
Such records could also be useful for research and educational institutions involved in tracing the
disease, mapping and analyzing the pathogens genome to develop vaccines that requires records
and data accuracy. Sound records management is more important than ever before with
Governments initiating unprecedented steps to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by all the stakeholders and in the
light of the decisions cited above as also the observations made in the previous paragraphs, the
Commission observed that very pertinent information pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic
situation was sought by the Complainant which could not be made available by any of the
Respondent. The fact that the application shuttled from one Division of the Public Authority to
another indicates that there is a very urgent requirement for notifying a Nodal Authority in the
M/o H&FW/ DGHS to compile, collate and consolidate the information sought in the RTI
application and suo motu upload the same on the website of the Public Authority. There is an
immense necessity to evolve a strong, robust and effective documentation mechanism and its
continuous updation which will be mutually beneficial not only for the Government but also for
the Scientists, Researchers, Academicians, Historians, Law Makers, etc for future.
Therefore, the Commission advises the Secretary, M/o H&FW to designate an officer of an
appropriate seniority as a Nodal Officer to examine the matter and suo motu disclose the
information sought in the RTI application on the website of the Public Authority within a period
of 15 days from the date of receipt of this order in the larger public interest.



The Complaints stand disposed accordingly.



(The Order will be posted on the website of the Commission).



                                                               Bimal Julka (िबमल जु का)
                                        Chief Information Commissioner (मु य सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत त)



K.L. Das (के .एल.दास)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26186535/ 
[email protected]

 दनांक / Date: 05.06.2020


                                                                                      Page 12 of 13

 Copy to:



1.         The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 'A' Wing, Nirman Bhawan,
           New Delhi-110011.



2.         The Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS), Room No. 446-A,
           Nirman Bhawan, Maulana Azad Rd, New Delhi, Delhi 110011





                                                                             Page 13 of 13