[Cites 
9
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Dr. C. P. Gupta vs High Commission Of India, London, ... on 17 March, 2020


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                              के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                          बाबा गंगनाथ माग,मुिनरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                        नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या / Second Appeal No. CIC/HCLUK/A/2018/616505

Dr. C. P. Gupta                                            ... अपीलकता/Appellant
                              VERSUS
                               बनाम
CPIO, M/o. External Affairs, New                           ... ितवादी/Respondent
Delhi.

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:

RTI : 22-11-2017            FA    : 15-03-2018          SA:13-04-2018

CPIO : 13-03-2018           FAO : 27-03-2018            Hearing: 16-03-2020

                                   ORDER



1.     The appellant filed an application under the 
Right to Information Act, 2005


(RTI Act
) before the Central Public Information Officer (CPIO), M/o. External
Affairs, New Delhi seeking information as follows:-

     "(1) Has Mrs. Manjree Garg ever applied for attestation of the Power of
     Attorney (POA)?

     (2) If yes, please arrange me the copy of the application form and the
     supporting documents (e.g. the copies of the court cases pending against
     her in Indian Court etc.) submitted by Manjree Garg for the attestation of
     the POA.

     (3) Whether any Consular officer has ever attested any Power of
     Attorney submitted by Mrs. Manjree Garg at HCI London or any other
     Indian Consulates in UK.

     (4) Please arrange me the copy of such Power of Attorney attested by the
     Consular Officer."

2.     The CPIO responded on 13-03-2018. The appellant filed the first appeal
dated 15-03-2018 which was disposed of by the first appellate authority on 27-03-
2018. Thereafter, he filed a second appeal u/
Section 19(3)
 of the RTI Act before

                                                                         Page 1 of 5

 the Commission requesting to take appropriate legal action against the CPIO
u/
Section 20
 of the RTI Act and also to direct him to provide the sought for
information.

Hearing:

3.     The appellant, Dr. C. P. Gupta attended the hearing through video
conferencing. Ms. Deepa Jain, US(RTI) and Mr. Subhash Chandra Agrawal, RTI
Consultant participated in the hearing representing the respondent in person. The
written submissions are taken on record.

4.     The appellant stated that there is delay in furnishing a reply to the RTI
application and therefore, an appropriate legal action should be initiated against the
CPIO u/
Section 20
 of the RTI Act.

5.     The representative of the respondent submitted that the appellant is seeking
third party information which is exempted u/
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005
and no public interest would be served in disclosing the same. Therefore, they have
denied him this information. In this regard, they have already furnished a reply to
the appellant vide their letter dated 13-03-2018. Regarding the delay, the
representative of the CPIO submitted that the exact reasons for the delay can be
ascertained from the concerned CPIO of the case.

Decision:

6.     This Commission observes that the documents of Mrs. Manjree Garg held
by the respondent in a fiduciary capacity is exempted u/
Section 8(1)(j)
 r/w 
Section
8(1)(e)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the absence of any larger public interest and hence,
the exemption claimed by the respondent is justified as its disclosure has potential
to cause unwarranted invasion in the privacy of Mrs. Manjree Garg.

7.     Further, this Commission observes that on point nos. 1, 2 and 3 of the RTI
application, the appellant attempts to elicit answers to his questions with prefixes,
such as, 'has', 'if yes' and 'whether'. Therefore, the CPIO is not supposed to
interpret information; or to furnish replies to situational queries; or to furnish
clarifications. Hence, the queries seeking answers and explanations from the CPIO
are not covered within the definition of 'information' u/
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI
Act, 2005. In this regard, the Commission refers to the definition of 'information'
u/s 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 which is reproduced below:-

              "information" means any material in any form, including
              records, documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press
              releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, report, papers,
              samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and
              information relating to any private body which can be accessed

                                                                            Page 2 of 5

              by a public authority under any other law for the time being in
             force."

Furthermore, a reference can also be made to the relevant extract of 
Section 2 (j)
 of
the RTI Act, 2005 which reads as under:-

            "(j) right to information" means the right to information
            accessible under this Act which is held by or under the control
            of any public authority and includes ........"

In this context, a reference is also made to the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in

CBSE and Anr. v. Aditya Bandopadhyay and Ors
, 2011 (8) SCC 497,wherein
it was held as under:-


            35..... "It is also not required to provide 'advice' or 'opinion'
            to an applicant, nor required to obtain and furnish any
            'opinion' or 'advice' to an applicant. The reference to
            'opinion' or 'advice' in the definition of 'information' in
            
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers to such material available in
            the records of the public authority. Many public authorities
            have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance
            and opinion to the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and
            should not be confused with any obligation under the 
RTI
            Act
."

Similarly, the High Court of Bombay in 
Dr. Celsa Pinto, Ex-Officio Joint
Secretary (School Education) v. The Goa State Information Commission
 on 3
April, 2008 (2008 (110) Bom L R 1238) had held as under:-


            "
Section 2(f)
 -Information means any material in any form,
            including records, documents, memos e-mails, opinions,
            advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts,
            reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
            electronic form and information relating to any private body
            which can be accessed by a public authority under any other
            law for the time being in force; The definition cannot include
            within its fold answers to the question why which would be the
            same thing as asking the reason for a justification for a
            particular thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot
            expect to communicate to the citizen the reason why a certain
            thing was done or not done in the sense of a justification
            because the citizen makes a requisition about information.
            Justifications are matter within the domain of adjudicating
            authorities and cannot properly be classified as information."

            The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the
            question why which would be the same thing as asking the
            reason for a justification for a particular thing. The Public

                                                                           Page 3 of 5

            Information Authorities cannot expect to communicate to the
           citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not done in
           the sense of a justification because the citizen makes a
           requisition about information. Justifications are matter within
           the domain of adjudicating authorities and cannot properly be
           classified as information."

8.    This Commission also observes that there is considerable delay in
responding to the RTI application and therefore, the then CPIO dealing with the
case who could not provide a reply to the appellant within the timeline prescribed
under the 
RTI Act, 2005
 is directed to show cause in writing the reasons for
contravening the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and explain why penalty should not be
imposed on him, within 15 days from the date of receipt of this order.

9.    With the above observations, the appeal is disposed of.

10. Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.


                                                             नीरज कु मार गु ा)
                                         Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरज           ा
                                                                 सूचना आयु )
                                       Information Commissioner (सू

                                                          दनांक / Date 16-03-2020

Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)

S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),
(011-26105682)





                                                                         Page 4 of 5

 Addresses of the parties:


   1. The CPIO
      M/o. External Affairs, Under
      Secretary & Nodal CPIO,
      (RTICell), Room No.-2021, A-Wing,
      Jawahar Lal Nehru Bhawan,
      23-D, Janpath, NewDelhi-110011




   2. Dr. C. P. Gupta





                                          Page 5 of 5