[Cites 
16
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Sagar Khanna vs University Of Delhi on 25 February, 2026


                             के ीय सूचना आयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                          बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                        नई िद ी, New Delhi - 110067


File No: CIC/UODEL/A/2025/100798

SAGAR KHANNA                                          .....अपीलकता/Appellant

                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम


CPIO,
MATA SUNDRI COLLEGE FOR WOMEN,
RTI CELL, UNIVERSITY OF DELHI,
MATA SUNDRI LANE, NEW DELHI-110002                    .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                     :    18.02.2026
Date of Decision                    :    25.02.2026

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :               Sudha Rani Relangi

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on            :    12.07.2024
CPIO replied on                     :    12.08.2024
First appeal filed on               :    01.09.2024
First Appellate Authority's order   :    03.10.2024
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated          :    04.01.2025

Information sought
:

1.    The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 12.07.2024 seeking the
following information:



      "1. Certified true copy of the question Paper of Mr. Sagar Khanna i.e. Roll
      No. MTS-LAB-167 as I participated in the examination held on 23rd day
      of November 2022.



                                                                        Page 1 of 8


       2. Certified true copy of the question paper and answer-sheet of Ms.
      Harpreet Kaur (Selected candidate) i.e. Roll No. MTS- LAB-056 in the
      examination held on 23rd day of November 2022."



2.    The CPIO furnished a reply to the Appellant on 12.08.2024 stating as
under:-



   "1. Information sought cannot be provided being sensitive information but
   you are allowed to inspect the Question Paper in the college premises on
   any working day with adequate prior intimation to the office.



   2. That the information sought cannot be disclosed being exempted under
   
section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, being personal Information."



 3. Aggrieved by the decision of the CPIO, the Appellant filed a First Appeal
    dated 01.09.2024. The FAA vide its order dated 03.10.2024 stated as
    under:-

      "1. The CPIO is justified in its reply that "Information sought cannot be
      provided being sensitive information, but you - are allowed to inspect the
      question paper in the college premises on any working day with
      adequate prior intimation to the office".

      Since it is their matter of policy that they we not provide certified true
      copies of the question paper of an examination, however, they allow the
      same to be inspected.



      2. That the said denial under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act was
      appropriate as the information sought is 'personal information' and
      purely information related to a third party, and the disclosure of which
      has no relationship to any public activity or interest is exempt under
      
Section8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act.

      Further, to disclose the copy of the question paper and answer sheet of
      the candidate who appeared in a particular examination, as it would be a
      greater invasion to the privacy of any third party if her question paper
      and answer sheet were disclosed to any other person other than her."



4.     Challenging the FAA's order, Appellant is before the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerged during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Shri Sagar Khanna present in person.

                                                                       Page 2 of 8


 Respondent: Shri Kapil Sharma, Off. SO (A/c.) along with Shri Srikant
Samantara, Advocate present in person.



5.    Written statement of the Appellant is taken on record.

6.     Appellant while narrating the factual background stated that he was one
of the candidates appeared in the exams conducted by Respondent Public
Authority for the post of MTS- Lab Attendant pursuant to an Advertisement
dated 15.11.2021. He was not selected and one candidate, Ms. Harpreet Kaur
was declared successful in the said exam. Appellant suspects irregularity in the
selection as the selected candidate, as per Appellant's version was directly
known to an officer of the College. To clarify the doubt the Appellant in
previous occasion filed RTI application and obtained copy of his own Answer
Sheet, where he noticed some anomaly. Therefore, through present RTI
application, he sought copy of his own question paper along with question
paper and answer sheet of the selected candidate. Appellant pleaded that
information sought was denied by the PIO in an arbitrary manner ignoring the
fact that it pertains to Appellant's career progress. In support of his arguments,
the Appellant brought attention of the Bench towards various case laws as
mentioned in his Second Appeal. He prayed the Commission to direct the PIO
to provide revised reply along with relevant information to the Appellant.

7.     Per contra, Ld. Counsel for the PIO stated that question paper for such
competitive exams are prepared by the experts for College which are limited in
number and used in repeated nature by merely changing its sequence number
in different exams. Ld. Counsel for the PIO also submits that the question
banks are prepared by persons/experts with whom the College holds a
fiduciary relationship to ensure that the same is not widely disbursed or
published, hence, the information on this count is exempted from disclosure
under 
Section 8 (1)(e)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. With respect to 
Section 8(1)(e)
 of
the RTI Act, 2005, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India v. Shaunak H. Satya, (Civil Appeal No. 7571 of 2011)
discussed the contours of the provision. Ld. Counsel for the Appellant stated
that henceforth, the PIO afforded opportunity of inspection of question paper
of Appellant's own paper, which he did not avail as such. Ld. Counsel for the
PIO stated that on directions of the Bench, he is willing to reiterate the
opportunity of inspection of relevant records pertaining to Appellant's own
question paper again. However, with respect to point No. 2 of RTI application,


                                                                         Page 3 of 8

 it was the plea of PIO that question paper and answer key of other candidates
pertains to their personal information, disclosure of which apparently invades
on their privacy. Therefore, such information is exempted from disclosure
under 
Section 8 (1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.

8.    Decision:

9.    Heard the parties at length.

10. The Commission observes from perusal of records that the core
contention of the Appellant in the instant Appeal was denial of request for
disclosure of his own question paper at point No. 1 of RTI application in
question and also denial of request for copy of question paper and answer
sheet of selected candidate at point No. 2, under 
Section 8 (1)(j)
 of the RTI Act,
2005.

11. At point No. 1 of RTI application, the PIO explained that question paper
for such competitive exams as the ones in question are prepared by the
experts for College which are limited in number and used in repeated nature
by merely changing its sequence number in different exams. Such question
papers are kept confidential by the College in fiduciary capacity to test the
analytical ability of the candidates. The disclosure of such information to the
public under 
RTI Act, 2005
 would compromise the selection process qua the
information sought. Hence, the opportunity of inspection of Appellant's own
question paper was afforded to the Appellant which he did not avail.

12. In this regard, the Commission agrees with the stand taken by the PIO
regarding availability of limited question paper/bank and disclosure of which
would have direct bearing against the selection process qua the filing up of
post/vacancy by the College. Here, a reference may be had on the judgement
of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the case of MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS VS.
K.G.ARUN KUMAR, W.P.(C) - 2173 / 2013 in which it was held:

 
"The controversy whether an examining body can be asked to disclose the
      question papers in circumstances where the number of questions are limited
      and are repeated, has been considered by this court in 
National Insurance Co.
      Ltd. v. Shri MSF Beig
: W.P.(C) No.272/2012 decided on 20.11.2014 and it has
      been held that in such cases, the examining body cannot be compelled to
      disclose the question papers.




      Accordingly, the present writ petition is allowed and the CIC?s order directing
      the petitioner to provide copy of question papers or provide OMR sheets is
      rejected. However, the petitioner would be entitled to inspect his answer

                                                                           Page 4 of 8

       sheets for the written examination which the learned counsel for the
      respondent states has already been provided to the respondent."



13. The above dicta is taking reference of the judgment of the same Court in

National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Shri MSF Beig, (W.P.(C) No.272/2012
), the
following relevant portion is reproduced below:




    "7. The exam conducted by NIA is essentially an exam for evaluating the
    candidates for promotion and to test their proficiency of the knowledge of
    the industry and the work involved.

    8. I am inclined to accept that since the promotional exam is in a nature of
    trade test, the questions would be limited. In these circumstances, a
    disclosure of question papers along with the answer key (model answers)
    would inevitably place the entire question bank in public domain and thus,
    effectively reduce the efficacy of the tests."



14. 
In addition, the Commission finds it expedient to refer to a decision of
the division bench of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the matter of 
All India
Institute of Medical Sciences vs. Vikrant Bhuria, (LPA
 487/2011) dated
28.05.2012 wherein the issue of disclosure of question papers finding its
source from a limited question bank vis-à-vis the right to information was
determined in a detailed manner as under:




    "16.... if question papers are so disclosed, the possibility of the examination
    not resulting in the selection of the best candidate cannot be ruled out. It is
    pleaded that knowledge of the question papers of all the previous years
    with correct answers may lead to selection of a student with good memory
    rather than an analytical mind. It is also pleaded that setting up of such
    question papers besides intellectual efforts also entails expenditure. The
    possibility of appellant,in a given year cutting the said expenditure by
    picking up questions from its question bank is thus plausible and which
    factor was considered by the Supreme Court also in the judgment
    aforesaid.

 
17. We also need to remind ourselves of the line of the judgments of which
    reference may only be made to State of Tamil Nadu Vs. K. Shyam Sunder
    
AIR 2011 SC 3470, The Bihar School Examination Board Vs. Subhas
    Chandra Sinha
 (
1970) 1 SCC 648, The University of Mysore Vs. C. D.
    Govinda Rao
 
AIR 1965 SC 491, Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and
    Higher Secondary Education Vs. Paritosh Bhupesh
 kumar Sheth (1984) 4
    SCC 27 holding that the Courts should not interfere with such decisions of
    the academic authorities who are experts in their field. Once the experts of


                                                                         Page 5 of 8

      the appellant have taken a view that the disclosure of the question papers
     would compromise the selection process, we cannot lightly interfere
     therewith.
 
Reference in this regard may also be made to the recent dicta in
     
Sanchit Bansal Vs. The Joint Admission Board (JAB
) (2012) 1 SCC 157
     observing that the process of evaluation and selection of candidates for
     admission with reference to their performance, the process of achieving
     the objective of selecting candidates who will be better equipped to suit
     the specialized courses, are all technical matters in academic field and
     Courts will not interfere in such processes. (Emphasis Supplied)


 
18. We have in our judgment dated 24.05.2012 in LPA No.1090/2011 titled
     
Central Board of Secondary Education Vs. Sh. Anil Kumar Kathpal
, relying
     on the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India Vs. Shaunak H. Satya

     (2011) 8 SCC 781 held that in achieving the objective of transparency and
     accountability of the 
RTI Act
, other equally important public interests
     including preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information are not to
     be ignored or sacrificed and that it has to be ensured that revelation of
     information in actual practice, does not harm or adversely affect other
     public interests including of preservation of confidentiality of sensitive
     information. Thus, disclosure of, marks which though existed, but were
     replaced by grades, was not allowed. Purposive, not literal interpretation
     of the 
RTI Act
 was advocated."




15.    Following the aforesaid decision, the same Court in 
All India Institute of
 Medical Sciences vs. Prakash Singh, W.P.(C
) 8916/2011, decided on
 06.12.2012, set aside the decision of CIC to disclose the question papers and
 answer keys pertaining to the MBBS Entrance Examination. The relevant
 extract of 
the said decision
 is quoted below:-




 
"I am of the view that while, undoubtedly, the examination qua which
     information was being sought in 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences v.
     Vikrant Bhuria
 case pertains to a super specialty course, where seats were
     limited, that by itself did not form the basis of the conclusion reached by
     the Division Bench. The view taken by the Division Bench is based on the
     fact that there is limited number of questions available to the petitioner,
     and that if, this information is put out in public domain then, it would be
     difficult for the petitioners to select candidates on the basis of their
     analytical ability. In other words, the examinee may perhaps take to the
     rote route to qualify the examination.


     The Division Bench has also observed that they would be loathe to interfere
     in areas where academicians, being experts, have expressed a view, to the



                                                                         Page 6 of 8

      effect that, disclosure of question papers and keys would compromise the
     selection process."



16.    Adverting to a catena of judgments as above, the Commission is of a
 considered opinion that the submissions of the CPIO in the instant case is
 found convincing.

17.    In light of above discussions, the Commission deems it fit to direct the
 PIO to provide one last opportunity of inspection of question paper in response
 to point No. 1 of RTI application to the Appellant, on a mutually convenient
 date and time, within two weeks from the date of receipt of this order.
 Intimation of date and time be informed to the Appellant well in advance by
 the PIO. Copy of records as may be desired by the Appellant be provided to
 him as permissible under the 
RTI Act
 upon receipt of requisite fees as per RTI
 Rules, 2012. Information that is exempted from disclosure under the 
RTI Act

 may be redacted/severed in accordance with 
section 10
 of the RTI Act, 2005.
 At the time of inspection, Appellant may be granted liberty to carry his own
 answer sheet with him.

18.    A compliance report to the above directions be filed by the Respondent
 before the Commission, immediately thereafter.

19.     For point No. 2 of RTI application, the Commission observes that denial
 of information by the PIO regarding question paper and answer sheet of the
 selected candidate is apparently personal information of third party, disclosure
 of which is exempted under 
Section 8 (1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, is appropriate.
 The Commission relied on a judgement of Hon'ble Apex Court in the case titled
 Girish Ramchandra Deshpande v. Central Information Commissioner & Ors.
 (SLP (Civil) No. 27734 of 2012) decided on 03.10.2012 wherein it was held:

    We are in agreement with the CIC and the courts below that the details
    called for by the petitioner i.e. copies of all memos issued to the third
    respondent, show cause notices and orders of censure/punishment etc. are
    qualified to be personal information as defined in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)

    of the RTI Act. The performance of an employee/officer in an organization
    is primarily matter between the employee and the employer and normally
    those aspects are governed by the service rules which fall under the
    expression "personal information", the disclosure of which has no
    relationship to any public activity or public interest. On the other hand, the
    disclosure of which would cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of that

                                                                         Page 7 of 8

    individual. Of course, in given case, if the Central Public Information Officer
   or the State Public Information Officer of the Appellate Authority is satisfied
   that the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such information,
   appropriate orders could be passed but the petitioner cannot claim those
   details as matter of right.

                                        ......

   16. We are, therefore, of the view that the petitioner has not succeeded in
   establishing that the information sought for is for the larger public interest.

   That being the fact, we are not inclined to entertain this special leave
   petition. Hence, the same is dismissed."

20. The Commission cannot lose sight of the fact that Section 44 (3) of
Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) Act 2023 brought into force w.e.f.
14.11.2025 which establishes that Public Authority, no longer requires to
justify withholding personal data by weighing Public interest against privacy.
Hence, no relief can be granted on this point of RTI application.



            The Appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                                       Sd/-

                                          Sudha Rani Relangi (सुधा रानी रे लंगी)
                                    Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स ािपत ित)

(Anil Kumar Mehta)
Dy. Registrar
011- 26767500
Date


Shri SAGAR KHANNA





                                                                        Page 8 of 8

                                    Recomendation(s) to PA under 
section 25(5)
 of the RTI Act, 2005:-



                                   Nil




Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)