[Cites 
4
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Dr. Santosh Narayan Mehrotra vs National Medical Commission (Nmc) on 29 September, 2022


Author: 
Heeralal Samariya


Bench: 
Heeralal Samariya


                             केन्द्रीय सूचना आयोग
                      Central Information Commission
                          बाबा गंगनाथ मागग ,मुननरका
                       Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                       नई निल्ली, New Delhi - 110067

 नितीय अपील संख्या/Second Appeal No.:              CIC/NMCOM/A/2021/152313

 Dr. Santosh Narayan Mehrotra                           .....अपीलकताग /Appellant

                                    VERSUS/बनाम



 Public Information Officer Under RTI,
 Under Secretary-(A) & CPIO,
 National Medical Commission
 (formerly Medical Council of India),
 Administration Section, Pocket-14,
 Sector-8, Dwarka, Phase-I,
 New Delhi-110077.




                                                          ...प्रनतवािीगण/Respondents

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

  RTI application filed on          :   03.07.2021
  CPIO replied on                   :   31.12.2021
  First appeal filed on             :   01.09.2021
  First Appellate Authority order   :   Not on record
  Second Appeal received at CIC     :   06.12.2021
  Date of Hearing                   :   29.09.2022
  Date of Decision                  :   29.09.2022


                   सूचना आयुक्त   : श्री हीरालाल सामररया
            Information Commissioner:    Shri Heeralal Samariya




                                                                          Page 1 of 6
 Information sought
:

The Appellant sought following information:



 • Dissatisfied with no response received from PIO, Appellant filed First
   Appeal, vide letter dated 01.09.2021.



 • Written submission has been received from PIO, vide letter 22.09.2022, as
   under:



                                                                   Page 2 of 6


     • The reply furnished by PIO, dated 31.12.2021, is as under:



Grounds for Second Appeal:

The PIO has not provided correct information to the Appellant.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present: -



Appellant: Reptt. By Dr. R.K. Awasthi, Present via V-C.

Respondent: Ms. Navaneetha Pramod, S.O., PIO, present.



Rep. of Appellant stated that relevant information, as sought in the instant matter,
has not been furnished to him by the concerned PIO. He further requested the
Commission to direct the concerned PIO to furnish a reply in the instant matter.



Written submission has been received from PIO, dated 22.09.2022, submitting
relevant point-wise reply to the Complainant. She also submitted that a previous
reply was also furnished to the Appellant, vide letter dated 31.12.2021. She
further submitted that he would abide by the orders of Commission, if any.



Upon Commission's instance, PIO submitted that no relevant records, with
regards to para 2 of instant matter, is available with the concerned department.



                                                                          Page 3 of 6


 Decision:



At the outset, Commission directs the concerned PIO to furnish a copy of their
reply, dated 22.09.2022, along with annexures, to the Appellant, free of cost via
registered post, within 07 days from the date of receipt of this order, and
accordingly, compliance report be sent to the Commission.



Furthermore, Commission, after perusal of case records and submissions made
during hearing, expresses displeasure over the conduct of the then PIO in not
having provided reply on the RTI Application within the stipulated time frame of

RTI Act
. Therefore, Commission directs then PIO through the present PIO to
send his/her written submissions to justify as to why action should not be
initiated against him/her under 
Section 20
 of the RTI Act for the gross violation
of its provisions. In doing so, if any other persons are also responsible for the
omission, the then PIO shall serve a copy of this order on such other persons
under intimation to the Commission and ensure that written submissions of all
such concerned persons are sent to the Commission. The said written
submission of then PIO along with submissions of other concerned persons,
if any, should reach the Commission within 30 days from the date of receipt
of this order.



The present PIO will ensure service of this order to then PIO.



Nevertheless, Commission has gone through the case records and on the basis of
proceedings during hearing observes that that under the 
RTI Act
 the CPIO can
only provide information which is available in the record. Thus, the appellant
cannot expect the respondent to take certain action or initiate action as desired by
him. 
In view of the foregoing, Commission deems it expedient to highlight that
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in its judgment dated 04.12.2014 in case of The
Registrar, Supreme Court of 
India vs. Commodore Lokesh K. Batra and Ors
.
[W.P.(C) No. 6634/2011] has held as under:




       "11. Insofar as the question of disclosing information that is not
       available with the public authority is concerned, the law is now well
       settled that the Act does not enjoin a public authority to create, collect or
       collate information that is not available with it. There is no obligation on
       a public authority to process any information in order to create further
       information as is sought by an applicant......."



                                                                          Page 4 of 6


 
Further, Hon'ble Supreme Court in its decision dated 09.08.2011 in the matter
of 
CBSE &Anr. vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay&ors
. (C.A. No. 6454 of 2011) has
held as under:




       "35......... But where the information sought is not a part of the record of
       a public authority, and where such information is not required to be
       maintained under any law or the rules or regulations of the public
       authority, the Act does not cast an obligation upon the public authority,
       to collect or collate such non-available information and then furnish it to
       an applicant..............."



In view of the above, the Commission upholds the submission of the CPIO and
further notes that an appropriate reply has been provided to the appellant by the
respondent, vide letter dated 22.09.2022.



However, to allay any subsequent apprehension of the Appellant, PIO must file
an appropriate affidavit stating that whatever information was available on
record, with regards to information/documents sought in para 2, has been
provided to the appellant and nothing material has been withheld from disclosure.



The said affidavit shall be sent by the PIO to the Commission with its copy duly
endorsed to the Appellant. The said direction of the Commission must be
complied within 30 days from the date of receipt of this order and accordingly
compliance report to this effect be duly sent to the Commission by the PIO. No
further action lies.



                    The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                          Heeralal Samariya (हीरालाल सामररया)
                                       Information Commissioner (सूचना आयुक्त)


Authenticated true copy
(अनिप्रमानणतसत्यानपतप्रनत)

Ram Parkash Grover (रामप्रकाशग्रोवर)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26180514



                                                                         Page 5 of 6

 Copy to be served through the PIO to:



Then PIO,
Under Secretary-(A) & CPIO,
National Medical Commission
(formerly Medical Council of India),
Administration Section, Pocket-14,
Sector-8, Dwarka, Phase-I,
New Delhi-110077.



 --(For complying with the directions mentioned as above)--



                                                              Page 6 of 6