[Cites 
20
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Kumar Medhavi vs Reserve Bank Of India on 14 July, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                           नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/RBIND/A/2021/643686

Kumar Medhavi
(Yes Bank Ltd.)                                     ......अपीलकता /Appellant

                                       VERSUS
                                        बनाम
CPIO,
Department of Supervision, Reserve
Bank of India, Central Office, Centre 1,
RTI Cell, Cuffe Parade, Colaba,
Mumbai-400005, Maharashtra                          .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                    :   03/07/2023
Date of Decision                   :   03/07/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :             Saroj Punhani

(Note: The instant appeal has been filed by the third party i.e. Yes Bank Ltd.
aggrieved by an order passed by the FAA, RBI). Proceedings in the matter are
being pursued in pursuance of the following interim decision dated 10.02.2022.

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on           :   16/10/2017
CPIO replied on                    :   26/02/2021
First appeal filed on              :   17/04/2021
First Appellate Authority order    :   18/06/2021
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated         :   18/09/2021


                                           1
 "The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case,
hearing both the parties and perusal of records, acceded to the request of the
appellant bank seeking stay on the CPIO's order 26.02.2021 and FAA's order dated
18.06.2021. The appellant is directed to file their written submissions before the
Commission after serving copies thereof upon the respondents within three weeks.
The respondents may also file their counter submissions within three weeks from
date of receipt of the submissions from the appellant bank. It may be noted that
the matter involves substantial questions of law determination of which require
detailed submissions from parties as well as their presence either in person or
through video conference. In view of this, the operation of the CPIO's order
26.02.2021 and FAA's order dated 18.06.2021 shall remain stayed till further
orders. Accordingly, the matter is adjourned."

Information sought
:

The RTI applicant Shri Rajiv Chandok filed an RTI application dated 16.10.2017
seeking the following information:



"With regard to the recent amendments in the 
Banking Regulation Act
 1949
where after 
Section 35AA
 and 
35AB
 have been added after the 
Section 35A
, I have
the following queries under 
Section 35A(1)(a)
:-



1. Kindly inform the names of all the defaulter companies/Business Entities having
NPA accounts with Rs.3000 crores or above (PAN INDIA BASIS). Kindly inform the
value of their NPAs (as of date) of each Party. Please provide this information in
tabular form bank wise.



2. In pursuance to the aforesaid amendment, kindly provide the total number and
names of companies/ Business Entities or Groups having NPA accounts that have
defaulted in the loan payments to their lender banks and action would be
PROPOSED by your Officer's Internal Advisory Committee (IAC) against such
defaulters at the National Company Law Tribunal under the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code 2016.



3. Kindly inform the name of the defaulter companies which have been referred
until now by your Office to the lender Banks to proceed under the provisions of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2016 (IBC) at the National Company Law
Tribunal.



                                        2


 4. What is the total value of the NPA's (as of date) of the defaulter companies of
Shri Vijay Mallaya i.e. the Kingfisher, UB Group of Companies and their allied
companies?



5. Have these companies been added in the aforesaid list of defaulters referred
uptil now for IBC proceedings at the NCLT? If the answer to the aforesaid question
is in the negative, then kindly inform the reasons why the said defaulter
companies have not been directed to be proceeded against with?



6. In case companies of Shri Vijay Mallaya have not been referred by the IAC of RBI
in the identified 12 defaulter list, kindly explain the reasons why the said
Committee has not referred the name of Shri Vijay Mallaya's companies.



7. Kindly provide all the names of the members of the IAC of RBI.



8. It is learnt from reliable sources that apart from the 12 large accounts that IAC
RBI has directed banks for proceeding under the IBC 2016, they have also referred
a list of 26 other big defaulters to be proceeded against with at the NCLT benches
at 10 locations. Kindly provide the name of the said defaulters as well."



In response, the CPIO vide its letter dated 26.02.2021 issued a notice
 u/s. 11(3)
 of
the RTI Act to the Appellant i.e. Yes Bank Ltd. stating as under:



       "Please refer to our letter No.DOS.CO.RIA.No.SK(118)/01.12.001/2020-21
(Vol.10) dated October 23, 2020 wherein we had issued a notice under 
section
11(1)
 read with 
section 11(2)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005 with respect to
captioned RTI request to enable you to make a written submission as to whether
the information may be disclosed or not along with reasons for exemption from
disclosure under any clause of 
RTI Act, 2005
. 2. After considering your response
(dated 28.10.2020) to the above notice, we intend to disclose the information on
entities having NPA accounts with Rs. 5000 Crores or above (PAN INDIA BASIS)
and the value of NPA of each entity and the bank wise information.



      Hence a Notice under 
Section 11(3)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 is hereby given
apprising you of the decision taken in the matter."



Being dissatisfied, the Appellant bank through its authorized representative filed a
First Appeal dated 17.04.2021. The FAA vide order dated 18.06.2021 has upheld
the reply of CPIO and appeal is dismissed accordingly.

                                         3


 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Appellant bank approached the
Commission with the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Shri Ashwini Chawla, Adv, representative of the Appellant bank
present through Intra Video-Conference.

Respondent: Shri Vinod Kumar, DGM present through Video-Conference.
Original RTI applicant: Not Present.



The written submissions of the Respondent are taken on record.



The representative of the Appellant bank, during the hearing, reiterated the
contents of his instant second appeal, which states as under:



"The FAA should have considered that the 
RTI Act
 does not apply to private
entities including private commercial banks and therefore, information pertaining
to the Bank and their customers and/or employees cannot be sought/provided
under the 
RTI Act
, let alone confidential/sensitive information of the Bank. In this
context, it is imperative to draw the distinction between a statutory
body/government entity vis-à-vis a corporate established under the 
Companies
Act, 2013
 and a banking company licensed to carry out banking activities under
the 
BR Act
. Merely because the corporate has got a statutory approval to carry on
a particular line of business does not ipso facto make it a statutory body or a
government body/Public Authority under the provisions of 
RTI Act
. Equally it is
important to appreciate that solely because a private banking company has an
oversight by RBI does not indicate that it is a Public Authority within the meaning
of the 
RTI Act
.

A careful reading of the judgment pronounced by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India
in the matter of 
Thalappalam Service Cooperative Bank Limited & Ors. Vs. State of
Kerala & Ors.
 [(2013) 16 SCC 82] ("Thalappalam Judgment") would reveal the
judicial rationale behind this distinction. In this context, this Hon'ble Commission
may be pleased to consider the Thalappalam Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court, which clearly recognizes the distinction between a statutory/government
body vis-à-vis a corporate body incorporated under a statute.


f) In the Thalappalam Judgment, Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the right to
information and right to privacy are not absolute rights, both the rights, one of

                                         4

 which falls under 
Article 19(1)(a)
 and the other under 
Article 21
 of the Constitution
of India, can obviously be regulated, restricted and curtailed in the larger public
interest. It was further held that the public authority also is not legally obliged to
give or provide information even if it is held, or under its control, if that
information falls under clause (j) of sub-section (1) of 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act.

The Hon'ble Supreme Court while substantiating its stand with a number of
precedents also held that if the information sought for is personal and has no
relationship with any public activity or interest or it will not sub-serve larger public
interest, the public authority or the officer concerned is not legally obliged to
provide those information. Also the Court stressed that the authority finds that
information sought for can be made available in the larger public interest, then
the officer should record his reasons in writing before providing the information,
because the person from whom information is sought for, has also a right to
privacy guaranteed under 
Article 21
 of the Constitution.
Relevant portion of the Thalappalam Judgment is reproduced below for your ready
reference: "The right to information and right to privacy are, therefore, not
absolute rights, both the rights, one of which falls under 
Article 19(1)(a)
 and the
other under 
Article 21
 of the Constitution of India, can obviously be regulated,
restricted and curtailed in the larger public interest. Absolute or uncontrolled
individual rights do not and cannot exist in any modern State. Citizens' right to get
information is statutorily recognised by the 
RTI Act
, but at the same time
limitations are also provided in the Act itself, which is discernible from the
Preamble and other provisions of the Act. First of all, the scope and ambit of the
expression "public authority" has been restricted by a statutory definition under

Section 2(h)
 limiting it to the categories mentioned therein which exhaust itself,
unless the context otherwise requires. Citizens, as already indicated by us, have a
right to get information, but can have access only to the information "held" and
under the "control of public authorities", with limitations. If the information is not
statutorily accessible by a public authority, as defined in 
Section 2(h)
 of the Act,
evidently, those information will not be under the "control of the public authority".
Resultantly, it will not be possible for the citizens to secure access to those
information which are not under the control of the public authority. The citizens, in
that event, can always claim a right to privacy, the right of a citizen to access
information should be respected, so also a citizen's right to privacy. 62. The public
authority also is not legally obliged to give or provide information even if it is held,
or under its control, if that information falls under clause (j) of subsection (1) of

Section 8
. 
Section 8(1)(j)
 is of considerable importance so far as this case is
concerned, hence given below, for ready reference: "8. Exemption from disclosure
of information.--(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there shall be

                                           5

 no obligation to give any citizen-- (a)-(i) *** (j) information which relates to
personal information the disclosure of which has no relationship to any public
activity or interest, or which would cause unwarranted invasion of the privacy of
the individual unless the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public
Information Officer or the appellate authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that
the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such information: Provided that
the information which cannot be denied to Parliament or a State Legislature shall
not be denied to any person." We would like to humbly submit that the FAA's
decision to disclose the Information to the RTI Applicant, might be in direct
violation of the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. g) We request you to
note that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the 
Reserve Bank of India vs. Jayantilal N
Mistry ("Jayantilal Judgment
") on the one hand directed RBI to disclose inspection
reports with the RTI applicants, while on the other, exempted certain information
that meets the threshold 
laid down in
 paragraph 76 of the Jayantilal Judgment,
from such disclosure. h) We would like to further respectfully submit that while
disclosing information under the 
RTI Act
, regard should have been accorded to the
confidential nature of the information, irrespective of whether the bank is a
private commercial banks or public sector bank. However, it is pertinent to
mention that the situation in case of a private commercial bank is more serious.
Unlike PSU banks, which are generally recapitalised and substantially financed by
Government of India, private sector banks rely majorly on foreign investors for
capital and is dependent on them to a great extent. It is the money from foreign
sources that is crucial in developing the country and its infrastructure, apart from
generating employment. As such, the peculiar position of the private sector bank
cannot and ought not to be ignored and any leak in the confidential information
pertaining to the Bank, is fatal, not only for the Bank, but may also result in far
reaching negative consequences on the economy as a whole. i) The FAA failed to
appreciate that the Bank, like any other bank, is bound by a confidentiality
arrangement with its customers /constituents. However, the same is partially
pierced and revealed to RBI, considering the regulatory supervisory authority
conferred on RBI by the RBI Act and BR Act. This cannot be further extrapolated by
the RTI Applicant under the provisions of the 
RTI Act
, as the consequences
/ramifications of misuse of the Information are extremely wide and incalculable j)
In this regard, FAA should have been mindful that in a banking company, there are
multiple stakeholders viz., depositors, borrowers, employees, shareholders,
bondholders, lenders to the Bank (domestic, foreign (FDI, FII)) etc. All of them may
not appreciate the nuances of the information contained in the Risk Assessment
Reports, for financial position as on 31 March 2018 and in the responses
(compliances) received from the Bank. Hence, the Information sought by the RTI

                                          6

 Applicant under the 
RTI Act
, if misused or abused, would have far reaching
consequences not only to the Bank and may even cause a systemic impact on the
economy. k) We also respectfully submit that there is no public interest being
served by deciding to share the Information sought by the RTI Applicant. On the
contrary, it is causing serious harm and injury to the interest of the Bank. The
financial stability of the country is paramount and depends on the strength of its
financial sector. Any wrong reporting by the media basis the Information sought
by the RTI Applicant, if shared and misused by him, can have devastating
consequences and can irreparably damage the reputation of the Bank. It is a
statutory protection given to banking companies, that no one will act in a manner
calculated to undermine the confidence of the depositors in the banking company
(Section 36 AD of the BR Act). It is extremely unclear as to how the RTI Applicant is
going to use the Information sought from RBI."




The Respondent, during the hearing, submitted that the information sought by
the RTI applicant in his RTI application should be disclosed as per 
Jayantilal Mistry

case.




Decision:

In the facts of the instant case, it is pertinent to note that a decision of a
coordinate bench of the Commission in the matter of various third-party banks vs.
RBI vide File No. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 covers a
detailed discussion inter alia on the same nature of information sought for from
the RBI and the reliance placed by RBI on the 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case. Suffice to say
that the issues raised in the instant case are encapsulated in that same discussion
of the coordinate bench in the following manner:




 
"39. A comprehensive view has to be taken on the objection filed by the
institutions. These objectives has to be deliberated and adjudicated in the light of

Jayantilal Mistry
's case and other judicial pronouncements relevant in such
matter, some of which have been referred by the Commission in the above parts
as well. The Commission while examining various objections realize that the Writ
Petitions filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is seeking directions of
the Supreme Court for non-disclosure of certain aspects of these audit/inspection
report and any such guidance in these Writ Petitions will have direct bearing and
provide further clarity to the CPIO/FAA in adjudicating various aspects of
disclosure/non-disclosure of reports or the information/data which are part of
these reports under the provisions of the 
RTI Act
.
 The Commission takes note that
all the cases/second appeals filed herein are based on interpretations of RBI Vs.

                                         7

 Jayantilal Mistry case and other relevant judicial pronouncements requesting for
full disclosure vis-à-vis with exemptions under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act for non-
disclosure of full or parts of these reports.

 
40. In view of the above observations, the Commission is of the view that
the reports generated in the hands of regulatory public authority in discharge of
its statutory obligations are information under 
Section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act, as the
regulator and the regulated entities are not governed by fiduciary relationship.
The orders of the Commission to their effect has been upheld by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case and the position is unchanged even
today. Various objections filed by banks/financial institutions, to be examined,
analyzed and adjudicated upon, are related to various data and information
submitted to the Reserve Bank of India by these financial institutions explaining
their operations, commercial decisions, clients data etc. under statutory
obligations can be disclosed as such. There are apparently two set of such
information which have been shared by the institutions with the regulator under
statutory obligation. First is the information/data of clients relating to their
business/commercial operations, financial transactions, business and commercial
strategy which is shared by clients with financial institutions in full trust and
confidence and is held by them in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure
under the 
RTI Act
 in their hands. Second set is the information relating to business
strategy, decisions, transactions, other operational data etc. of financial
institutions have been bearing on their competitive position which also enjoys the
exemption from disclosure in their hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise,
under the 
RTI Act
. Some of such data, on case to case basis be sensitive enough for
protection of national interest. The Commission is of the view that the protection
of disclosure of information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of
financial institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in
good faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligation.
 
Various
observations of Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case also does not
indicate so and decision of the regulator to consider redacting such
data/information while disclosing the reports is aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts.


 
41. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of
the CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care
has to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making
reasoned order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and later
in the hands of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be required to
adjudicate such RTI applications in the light of the observations of the Commission
afresh. The Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various

                                         8

 objections filed by the Banks and Financial Institutions and submissions made by
applicant to reach the decision in favour or against redaction of various parts of
the report on case to case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case and other relevant judgments, some of
which have been referred in this order as well. Hence, with these observations the
orders passed by the CPIO and FAA in these matters are set aside and the cases
are being remanded to the CPIO for adjudication afresh. (Emphasis Supplied)


       42. It is amply clear that Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and
others tagged are admitted in Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein guidance and
direction has been sought on non-disclosure of certain type of information which
are essentially the part of the Annual Inspection Report/RAR, etc. These petitions
also seek protection of interim communication between regulator and the
regulated entity in the process of finalization of these reports or otherwise. It is
obvious that decision in these Writ Petitions will provide clarity and guidance to
the Public Authority on redaction/non-disclosure of a set of information inspite of
being part of these reports which are open to disclosure. At this stage, any
decision by the Public Authority will amount to pre-judging the issues pending
admitted Writ Petitions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Various banks,
financial institutions, respondent public authority and the RTI applicant have
already impleaded party and are presenting their arguments before the Apex
Court.

       43. Hence, any decision of redaction or disclosure of information, without
waiting for decision in the Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged may cause irrevocable damage against right of privacy and protection of
commercial interest. Hence, the respondent public authority if expedient may
wait for the outcome in Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged or seek clarification from the Hon'ble Court and accordingly decide these
RTI applications by following process as enumerated in the earlier paras by the
Commission in the interest of principles of natural justice. While disclosing the
information they should be cautious in taking a considerate view balancing right
to privacy, protection of national and commercial interest on one hand vis-à-vis
larger public interest. (Emphasis Supplied)

 
44. It is further observed that similar view has also been taken by the
Division Bench of the Commission in file bearing nos. CIC/VS/A/2013/001488 and
CIC/VS/A/2013/001805 dated 11.05.2017 wherein the Commission observed that
'Having considered the submissions of both the parties, the Commission observes
that since a similar issue is pending adjudication before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the matter of Central for 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. &Ors.
, it would be judicious to await the final

                                         9

 outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court. However, on receipt of the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter, the appellant shall be at
liberty to file second appeal afresh, if he so desires. The instant appeals are
disposed of'."




The above decision is therefore applicable to the instant case and no separate line
of adjudication is warranted in the matter. The stipulations contained in File No.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 stands endorsed to the
Respondent CPIO with emphasis on para 41 & 43 supplied as above .



                      The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                        10