[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Naresh Kadyan vs Animal Welfare Board Of India on 6 January, 2022


                                                       CIC/AWBIC/A/2020/673392

                                  के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                            बाबा गंगनाथ माग,मुिनरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या/ Second Appeal No. CIC/AWBIC/A/2020/673392
In the matter of:

Naresh Kadyan                                                  ... अपीलकता/Appellant
                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम

CPIO,                                                     ... ितवादीगण /Respondent
Animal Welfare board of India
13/1, Third Seaward Road,
Valmiki Nagar, Thiruvanmiyur,
Chennai- 600 041
Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:

RTI Application filed on                   :   03.06.2019
CPIO replied on                            :   Not on Record
First Appeal filed on                      :   31.07.2019
First Appellate Authority order            :   Not on Record
Second Appeal received on                  :   09.06.2020
Date of Hearing                            :   04.01.2022

The following were present:

Appellant: Shri Naresh Kadyan participated in the hearing through intra-video
conferencing from Central Information Commission.

Respondent: Shri Narendra Kumar, CPIO and Under Secretary, Dept. of Animal
Husbandry and Smt. Prachi Jain, CPIO and Asst. Secretary, Animal Welfare Board
of India participated in the hearing through intra-video conferencing from Central
Information Commission.


                                                                           Page 1 of 8
                                                       CIC/AWBIC/A/2020/673392

                                      ORDER



Information sought:

The Appellant filed an online RTI Application dated 03.06.2019 seeking
information on the following seventeen points:



      "Kindly refer to the various orders passed by the Honble Supreme Court of India,
      State High Courts with the circular of Animal Welfare Board of India and article
      48 - 51 A (g) of Indian Constitution, keeping view these position, following
      information along with copies of all communication made & received with
      concerned Noting sheet be provided:

      1. Status reports on the decision taken in the 120th ECM on 13.2.2018 related to
          Gochar land along with all communications made & received with noting
          sheets.

      2. Action taken report with all communications made & received as per item No 4
          & 12 of 120th ECM along complete details of setting up a Animal Hostel in
          gocharan land and grazing land, to avoid animals are being throuwn out of the
          cities.

      3. Complete details about delegation of AWBI power as per 
section 37
 of the
          PCA Act, 1960.

      4. Complete details about delegation of Police power as per 
section 34
 of PCA
          Act, 1960

      5. Complete list and details of Infirmaries set up - functional as per 
section 35
 of
          PCA Act, 1960

      6. Complete details about 2nd offense against animals, proved under the 
section
          29
 of PCA Act, 1960

      7. Complete details about offenses registered for the violation of 
section 12
 of
          PCA Act, 1960 along with the present status of abused animals, confiscated
          due to 
section 12
 violations.

      8. Complete list of Masters Trainers along with complete details about guest
          faculties for Masters Trainers course.

      9. Information regarding gochar land was obtained vide AWBI letter dated 5-3-
          2018, deadline was 30-4-2018, hence supply me copies of para wise 1-11
          replies, obtained reports, communications made & received with noting sheets.

      10. Complete details about Scheme for Development of Gocharan land for
          providing fodder and shelter to animals along with complete list of
          beneficiaries.

      11. Species wise census of domestic - stray - abandoned animals, birds, reptiles
          with wild animals





                                                                                 Page 2 of 8

                                                      CIC/AWBIC/A/2020/673392


      12. Remove all encroachments from Gauchar land all around India with time
          frame.

      13. Restoration of title Gauchar land, which was registered without any Authority
          to the ineligible persons, holding accountable.

      14. Status reports on the installation of animal scanner at each toll tax plaza to
          prevent cruelty against animals, Shri Parshottam Rupala, MOS office Note was
          supplied to AWBI for immediate action, let me the status of action taken.

      15. Complete details about al HAWO, Trainers, Inspectors, CPSCSEA Nominees
          along with batch wise trained people at NIAW, since beginning till date to
          prepare alumbi of ex students.

      16. Complete details about Camels registered as performing animals without any
          shifting rules, vehicle or mechanism., Explain their status.

      17. Status about Naresh Kadyan application about display of Yak during winter
          seasons around NCR during temperature up to 17 degree."



Having not received any information from the CPIO, the Appellant filed a First
Appeal dated 31.07.2019, which has not been adjudicated by the First Appellate
Authority as per available records.



Grounds for Second Appeal:

The Appellant filed a Second Appeal
 u/s 19
 of the Act on the ground of non-
receipt of information from the Respondent.



Submissions made by Appellant and Respondent during Hearing:

The Appellant stated that no reply has been provided by the Respondent till date.



The Respondent submitted that point-wise reply was provided to the Appellant
vide letter dated 02.07.2019.



A written submission has been received by the Commission from Dr. S.K. Dutta,
Appellate Authority and Secretary vide letter dated 28.12.2021, wherein he has
apprised the Commission as under:



                                                                               Page 3 of 8


                                                     CIC/AWBIC/A/2020/673392




Decision:

Upon perusal of the facts on record as well as on the basis of the proceedings
during the hearing, the Commission observes that though a point-wise reply was
provided by the Respondent, the same has not been received by the Appellant.
Hence, the Commission deems it expedient to direct the present CPIO, Animal
Welfare Board of India to re-send the letter dated 02.07.2019 to the Appellant,
through speed post, within 7 days from the date of receipt of this order.
Notwithstanding the above, the Commission expresses severe displeasure against
the conduct of the Appellant because initially he had informed the Registry of this
Bench to exempt his appearance in person and had requested the Bench to grant
permission to take part in the hearing virtually (WhatsApp video/audio call), which
was rejected by the Commission. Subsequently, the Commission was generous
enough to grant him an opportunity to take part in the instant hearing from NIC
Ahmedabad, which was booked from 1120 hrs to 1350 hrs (for 16 cases listed on
04.01.2022), yet, the Appellant chose to take part in the proceedings, physically,
thereby disrespecting the Commission's efforts in scheduling the instant hearing.

Be that as it may, the queries sought in the instant RTI Application are not only
lengthy but cryptic and unspecific. Therefore, The Commission counsels the



                                                                            Page 4 of 8

                                                      CIC/AWBIC/A/2020/673392

Appellant to be careful, mindful and watchful in future while filing RTI
Applications and not to flood the public authority by filing umpteen numbers of
RTI Applications. In this regard the Commission finds it relevant to rely upon
certain judgments of various Courts in India, wherein the factum of misuse of the
right to information has been highlighted adequately. The excerpts of the same are
as under:

   a. The Hon'ble High Court of Madras in the matter of Public Information
      Officer, Registrar (Administration) vs. B. Bharathi., W.P. No. 26781/2013
      dated 17.09.2014 has also given its opinion about vexatious litigation
      crippling the public authorities and held as follows:

            "... The action of the second respondent in sending numerous complaints
            and representations and then following the same with the RTI applications;
            that it cannot be the way to redress his grievance; that he cannot overload
            a public authority and divert its resources disproportionately while
            seeking information and that the dispensation of information should not
            occupy the majority of time and resource of any public authority, as it
            would be against the larger public interest..."

 
[Emphasis supplied]

   b. The Hon'ble High Court in the matter of 
Shail Sahni v. Sanjeev Kumar &
      Ors., W.P.(C
) 845/2014 has stated as under:


            "... Consequently, this Court deems it appropriate to refuse to exercise its
            writ jurisdiction. Accordingly, present petition is dismissed. This Court is
            also of the view that misuse of the 
RTI Act
 has to be appropriately dealt
            with, otherwise the public would lose faith and confidence in this "sunshine
            Act". A beneficial Statute, when made a tool for mischief and abuse must
            be checked in accordance with law..."

                                                                    [Emphasis supplied]





                                                                               Page 5 of 8

                                                      CIC/AWBIC/A/2020/673392

   c. In the matter of Rajni Mendiratta v. Dte. of Education (North West-B].,
      W.P.(C) no. 7911/2015, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi vide its order
      dated 08.10.2015 stated as under:

            "8. ... Though undoubtedly, the reason for seeking the information is not
            required to be disclosed but when it is found that the process of the law is
            being abused, the same become relevant. Neither the authorities created
            under the 
RTI Act
 nor the Courts are helpless if witness the provisions of
            law being abused and owe a duty to immediately put a stop thereto..."



In addition, the Commission would not be wrong to consider that the Appellant's
move to seek voluminous information is only to harass the public authority and not
with an intention to seek information. The Appellant rather appears to have
converted the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 as a tool of oppression/intimidation, which
the Commission discourages outrightly.



 
d. In the matter of 
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India vs.
      Shaunak H. Satya and Ors.
, AIR 2011 SC 3336, the Hon'ble Supreme
      Court of India has held as under:


            "... 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and
            existing. This is clear from a combined reading of Section 3 and the
            definitions of 'information' and 'right to information' under Clauses (f) and

            (j) of 
Section 2
 of the Act. If a public authority has any information in the
            form of data or analysed data, or abstracts, or statistics, an applicant may
            access such information, subject to the exemptions in 
Section 8
 of the Act.

            But where the information sought is not a part of the record of a public
            authority, and where such information is not required to be maintained
            under any law or the rules or regulations of the public authority, the Act
            does not cast an obligation upon the public authority, to collect or collate
            such non-available information and then furnish it to an applicant. The
            right to information is a fundamental right as enshrined in 
Article 10
 of the
            Constitution of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has declared in a
            plethora of cases that the most important value for the functioning of a
            healthy and well-informed democracy is transparency. However it is
            necessary to make a distinction in regard to information intended to bring
            transparency, to improve accountability and to reduce corruption, falling



                                                                                Page 6 of 8

                                                    CIC/AWBIC/A/2020/673392

           under 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and (c) and other information which may not have a
           bearing on accountability or reducing corruption. The competent
           authorities under the 
RTI Act
 will have to maintain a proper balance so
           that while achieving transparency, the demand for information does not
           reach unmanageable proportions affecting other public interests, which
           include efficient operation of public authorities and government,
           preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information and optimum use..."



e. In the matter of 
Central Board of Secondary Education & Anr. V. Aditya
  Bandopadhyay & Ors.
, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held as
  under:


  "33. ... 
The Act
 seeks to bring about a balance between two conflicting interests,
  as harmony between them is essential for preserving democracy. One is to bring
  about transparency and accountability by providing access to information under
  the control of public authorities. The other is to ensure that the revelation of
  information, in actual practice, does not conflict with other public interests
  which include efficient operation of the governments, optimum use of limited
  fiscal resources and preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information. The
  preamble to the Act specifically states that the object of the Act is to harmonise
  these two conflicting interests...

  ...

  37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and right to
  information are intended to be formidable tools in the hands of responsible
  citizens to fight corruption and to bring in transparency and accountability... ...
  Indiscriminate and impractical demands or directions under 
RTI Act
 for
  disclosure of all and sundry information (unrelated to transparency and
  accountability in the functioning of public authorities and eradication of
  corruption) would be counter-productive as it will adversely affect the efficiency
  of the administration and result in the executive getting bogged down with the
  non-productive work of collecting and furnishing information. 
The Act
 should
  not be allowed to be misused or abused, to become a tool to obstruct the national
  development and integration, or to destroy the peace, tranquility and harmony
  among its citizens. Nor should it be converted into a tool of oppression or
  intimidation of honest officials striving to do their duty. The nation does not want
  a scenario where 75% of the staff of public authorities spends 75% of their time
  in collecting and furnishing information to applicants instead of discharging
  their regular duties. The threat of penalties under the 
RTI Act
 and the pressure
  of the authorities under the 
RTI Act
 should not lead to employees of a public
  authorities prioritizing 'information furnishing', at the cost of their normal and
  regular duties..." [Emphasis supplied]




                                                                             Page 7 of 8

                                                     CIC/AWBIC/A/2020/673392

Keeping in view of the aforesaid observations, the Commission sternly cautions
the Appellant to use his right to information in a judicious manner.
With the above observations, the instant Second Appeal is disposed of.
Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.

                     The Appeal, hereby, stands disposed of.



                                       Amita Pandove (अिमता पांडव)
                                       Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
                                        दनांक / Date: 05.01.2022
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत ित)


B. S. Kasana (बी. एस. कसाना)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26105027


Addresses of the parties:

1. The First Appellate Authority (FAA)
Animal Welfare board of India 13/1,
Third Seaward Road, Valmiki Nagar,
Thiruvanmiyur, Chennai- 600 041


2. The Central Public Information Officer
Animal Welfare board of India
13/1, Third Seaward Road, Valmiki Nagar,
Thiruvanmiyur, Chennai- 600 041


3. Mr. Naresh Kadyan





                                                                         Page 8 of 8