[Cites 
17
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Sankalp Srivastava vs Reserve Bank Of India on 19 July, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                              के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                           बाबा गंगनाथ माग , मुिनरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                         नई  द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/RBIND/A/2021/139440

 Sankalp Srivastava
(RBL Bank Ltd.)                                          ......अपीलकता /Appellant

                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम


CPIO,                                                 .... ितवादीगण /Respondent
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Supervision
Central Office, World Trade Centre-1
Cuffe Parade, Colaba, Mumbai-400005

Date of Hearing                   :   10/07/2023
Date of Decision                  :   10/07/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

(Note: The instant appeal has been filed by the third party i.e. RBL Bank Ltd.
aggrieved by an order passed by the FAA, RBI). Proceedings in the matter are
being pursued in pursuance of the following interim decision dated 10.02.2022.

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on          :   09/02/2021
CPIO replied on                   :   15/03/2021
First appeal filed on             :   05/04/2021
First Appellate Authority order   :   16/07/2021
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated        :   20/09/2021

                                        1
 "The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case, hearing
both the parties and perusal of records, acceded to the request of the appellant
bank seeking stay on the CPIO's decision 15.03.2021 and FAA's order dated
16.07.202l.The appellant is directed to file their written submissions before the
Commission after serving copies thereof upon the respondents within three weeks.
The respondents may also file their counter submissions within three weeks from
date of receipt of the submissions from the appellant bank. It may be noted that the
matter involves substantial questions of law determination of which require
detailed submissions from parties as well as their presence either in person or
through video conference. In view of this, the operation of the CPIO's decision
15.03.2021 and FAA's order dated 16.07.2021 shall remain stayed till further orders.
Accordingly, the matter is adjourned."

Information sought
:

The RTI applicant Shri Vathiraj filed an RTI application dated 09.02.2021 seeking the
following information:



I. Copy of Internal Ombudsman decision submitted by the bank with regard to my
Complaint 202021013011503 against RBL Bank.

Ia. Copy of exemption or waiver granted to RBL Bank from internal Ombudsman
scheme.



2. Number of complaints received against RBL Bank s wrongful recovery practices
from Ilan 2019 to 31 Jan 2021 ( please furnish data for Mumbai and all India
separately)


3. No of complaints in SI no 2 decided in favour of bank and against the bank may
be furnished separately. ( Mumbai and all India figures required separately) 3a.
Number of instances and quantum of compensation awarded to victims of wrongful
recovery process of RBL Bank. ( No personal information is soughtX2019-21) (
Mumbai and all India


4. Details of system level action taken by RBI Ombudsman on recovery complaints
against RBL Bank. (2019-21) ( Mumbai and all India)


5. communication flow and nature of action taken on my emails addressed to
Deputy Governor M K Jain on my complaint against RBI Bank ( 2020-21)




                                         2


 6. Details of exemption granted by RBI to RBL Bank to continue to undertake for
moratorium opted customers and waiver from implementation of RBI instructions
on moratorium.( From date of issue of moratorium circular) 6a. Details of
exemption or waiver granted by RBI to RBL towards additional factor authentication
for CNP transactions. ( From date of issue of AFA circular)

6b. Details of card authentication solutions provided by card networks approved by
RBI and the date of such approval, name of network authorised ( from date of issue
of rbi circular in this regard).



7. Copies of correspondence between Ombudsmen offers and supervisory
departments of rbi on complaints of illegal recovery by RBL Bank. ( 2019.202 I)


8. Details of supervisory action taken by RBI on RBL bank. ( 2014 to 2021)


9. Copy of RBL inspection report carrying observations on recovery, customer service
(even supreme court has ruled that inspection reports cant be withheld). (
Inspection period 2014-2021)

10. Details of meetings held by Ombudsman Office with RBL officials and nature of
hospitality extended.( I Jan 2020- 31 Jan 2021).



11. Details of action taken against RBL Bank on my complaint of erroneous recovery
practices.



12. Details of action taken on my complaint against RBI, Bank on violation of AFA
requirements.



13. Name of dealing person in complaints against RBL Bank .



The CPIO vide its letter dated 15.03.2021 had sent a notice
 u/s. 11
 of the RTI Act
to the Appellant bank i.e. RBL Bank Ltd. stating as under:



"Notice under 
section 11(3)
 of the Right to Information Act 2005 -- Our ref No.
RBIND/RrE/21101255 - Request by Shri Vathiraj

Please refer to our letter dated March 03, 2021 wherein we had issued a notice
under 
section 11(1)
 read with 
section 11(2)
 of the Right to Information Act 2005
with respect to a R71 request No. RBIND/RE/21/01255 from Shri Vathiraj to enable
you to make a written submission as to whether the information may be disclosed

                                         3

 or not along with reasons for exemption from disclosure under any clause of 
RTI
Act, 2005
.



After considering your response dated March 10, 2021 to the above notice, we
intend to disclose the RBI Inspection Reports for Financial Years 2013-14 and 2016-
17 of your bank to the applicant, after severing the information exempt from
disclosure under 
section 10 (1)
 of RTI Act. 2005.



Hence a Notice under 
Section 11(3)
 of the RTI Act 2005 is hereby given apprising
you of the decision taken by CPIO in the matter.



If you desire to prefer an appeal against this decision, the same may be preferred
within 30 days to the First Appellate Authority in Reserve Bank of India. Shri P Vijaya
Kumar, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India, Department of Supervision, World
Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade Mumbai-400 005. In case any such appeal is preferred
by you within the stipulated period the same may be communicated to CPIO DOS.
In case no such intimation is received within 30 days from the date of receipt of this
notice by you. information would be disclosed to the applicant without any further
communication to you."



Being dissatisfied, the Appellant bank through its authorized representative filed a
First Appeal dated 05.04.2021. FAA's order, dated 16.07.2021 is as under:



"In order to withhold any information sought by applicants under 
RTI Act
, such
information should fall within any of the exempted items under 
Section 8
 and 
9
 of
the RTI Act. If any part of requested information qualifies for exemption. CPIO would
be free to sever/blackout such part and provide the information. It would not be
possible to claim the exemption from disclosure under 
Section 8(1Xd)
 and (e) in view
of the judgment of the Supreme Court In 
Reserve Bank of India &Ors. v. Jayantilal
N. Mistry & Ors.
, (2016)3 SCC 5.25. Moreover, the CPIO has decided to disclose the
information. after severing the information, exempt from disclosure, under 
section
10 (1)
 of RTI Act. 2005. The exemption under Section S(1)(j) is available in respect of
'personal information of an individual. The word 'personal Information used in

section 8(1)(j)
 may not cover the information relating to a body corporate. If the
information includes details of 'individuals', the same may be an exempted
information under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RD Act, 2005.




In view of the aforesaid observations, I find no merit in the appeal which is liable to
be dismissed as such. The appeal is dismissed."

                                          4


 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Appellant bank approached the Commission
with the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Shri Anand Shankar Jha, Adv representative of the Appellant bank
present through Intra Video-Conference.

Respondent: Shri Abhishek Joshi, AGM and Ms. Kumkum Badgujjar, ALA present
through Video-Conference.

RTI Applicant: Present through Video-Conference.



The written submissions of the Respondent are taken on record.



The representative of the Appellant bank reiterated the contents of their second
appeal, which states as under:



"Because the Ld. First Appellate Authority and the Ld. CPIO failed to appreciate that
the information, proposed to be disclosed, is in the nature of credit information and
the same was supplied to the Reserve bank of India in fiduciary capacity as the
Regulator under the provisions of the 
Banking Regulation Act
 as well as the 
Credit
Information Companies Regulation Act, 2005
 (CICRA). It is submitted that under the
provisions of CICRA there is a specific bar on the disclosure of such credit
information. Further, 
Section 17(4)(a)
 of the Act, clearly mentions that no credit
information shall be disclosed to any person other than its specified user.
It is also submitted that the Appellant Bank is privy to personal details of its account
holders which are mandatorily required to be kept confidential. The banks such as
the Appellant Bank herein are required to maintain privacy especially in light of
judgement of Honble Supreme Court in the matter of K.S. Puttaswamy us Union of
India.

Because the Ld. First Appellate Authority and the Ld. CPIO grossly erred in not
appreciating that the Appellant Bank is a listed public limited company and thus is
also governed, regulated and subject to the applicable regulations and rules as
formulated by the Securities Exchange Board of India (SEBI) which specifically bars
the direct or indirect release of any unpublished price sensitive information. That
the information as proposed to be released by the Ld. First Appellate Authority and
the CPIO is likely to include price sensitive information which are capable of abuse
and distortion by public at large."

                                           5


 The representative of the Appellant bank further referred to the Commission's
decision dated 05.05.2022 and submitted that same is applicable to this case also.



The Respondent, during the hearing, submitted that the information sought by the
RTI applicant in his RTI application should be disclosed as per 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case.




The RTI applicant Shri Vathiraj submitted that he has sought specific information in
his RTI application but the same was wrongly not provided to him. He further
contended that the Appellant bank has wrongly contested that the matter was
pending before the Hon'ble Supreme Court, as the RBL Bank is not a litigant in the
matter pending before the Court and no stay order was granted to the Appellant
bank. Therefore, the Appellant bank has no locus standi in the said matter. He
stated that now public sector banks are disclosing the information, therefore, no
special treatment is to be given to the private sector banks. He stated that it is a
statutory information and should be disclosed to the RTI applicants.



Decision:



In the facts of the instant case, it is pertinent to note that a decision of a coordinate
bench of the Commission in the matter of various third-party banks vs. RBI vide File
No. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 covers a detailed
discussion inter alia on the same nature of information sought for from the RBI and
the reliance placed by RBI on the 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case. Suffice to say that the issues
raised in the instant case are encapsulated in that same discussion of the
coordinate bench in the following manner:




 
"39. A comprehensive view has to be taken on the objection filed by the
institutions. These objectives has to be deliberated and adjudicated in the light of

Jayantilal Mistry
's case and other judicial pronouncements relevant in such matter,
some of which have been referred by the Commission in the above parts as well.


The Commission while examining various objections realize that the Writ Petitions
filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is seeking directions of the Supreme
Court for non-disclosure of certain aspects of these audit/inspection report and any
such guidance in these Writ Petitions will have direct bearing and provide further
clarity to the CPIO/FAA in adjudicating various aspects of disclosure/non-disclosure
of reports or the information/data which are part of these reports under the
provisions of the 
RTI Act
. The Commission takes note that all the cases/second
appeals filed herein are based on interpretations of RBI Vs. Jayantilal Mistry case

                                           6

 and other relevant judicial pronouncements requesting for full disclosure vis-à-vis
with exemptions under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act for non-disclosure of full or parts
of these reports.

 
40. In view of the above observations, the Commission is of the view that the
reports generated in the hands of regulatory public authority in discharge of its
statutory obligations are information under 
Section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act, as the
regulator and the regulated entities are not governed by fiduciary relationship. The
orders of the Commission to their effect has been upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case and the position is unchanged even today. Various
objections filed by banks/financial institutions, to be examined, analyzed and
adjudicated upon, are related to various data and information submitted to the
Reserve Bank of India by these financial institutions explaining their operations,
commercial decisions, clients data etc. under statutory obligations can be disclosed
as such. There are apparently two set of such information which have been shared
by the institutions with the regulator under statutory obligation. First is the
information/data of clients relating to their business/commercial operations,
financial transactions, business and commercial strategy which is shared by clients
with financial institutions in full trust and confidence and is held by them in fiduciary
capacity, protected from disclosure under the 
RTI Act
 in their hands. Second set is
the information relating to business strategy, decisions, transactions, other
operational data etc. of financial institutions have been bearing on their
competitive position which also enjoys the exemption from disclosure in their hands,
if it is a public authority or otherwise, under the 
RTI Act
. Some of such data, on case
to case basis be sensitive enough for protection of national interest. The
Commission is of the view that the protection of disclosure of information under

Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of financial institutions does not
evaporate once such data/information is shared, in good faith and trust, with the
regulator under statutory obligation.
 
Various observations of Hon'ble Supreme
Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case also does not indicate so and decision of the
regulator to consider redacting such data/information while disclosing the reports
is aligned with this and other judicial pronouncements of Supreme Court and High
Courts.


 
41. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of the
CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care has
to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making reasoned
order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and later in the hands
of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be required to adjudicate
such RTI applications in the light of the observations of the Commission afresh. The
Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various objections filed by

                                           7

 the Banks and Financial Institutions and submissions made by applicant to reach
the decision in favour or against redaction of various parts of the report on case to
case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal
Mistry
 case and other relevant judgments, some of which have been referred in this
order as well. Hence, with these observations the orders passed by the CPIO and
FAA in these matters are set aside and the cases are being remanded to the CPIO
for adjudication afresh. (Emphasis Supplied)


       42. It is amply clear that Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and
others tagged are admitted in Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein guidance and
direction has been sought on non-disclosure of certain type of information which
are essentially the part of the Annual Inspection Report/RAR, etc. These petitions
also seek protection of interim communication between regulator and the
regulated entity in the process of finalization of these reports or otherwise. It is
obvious that decision in these Writ Petitions will provide clarity and guidance to the
Public Authority on redaction/non-disclosure of a set of information inspite of being
part of these reports which are open to disclosure. At this stage, any decision by the
Public Authority will amount to pre-judging the issues pending admitted Writ
Petitions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Various banks, financial institutions,
respondent public authority and the RTI applicant have already impleaded party
and are presenting their arguments before the Apex Court.

       43. Hence, any decision of redaction or disclosure of information, without
waiting for decision in the Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged may cause irrevocable damage against right of privacy and protection of
commercial interest. Hence, the respondent public authority if expedient may wait
for the outcome in Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others tagged
or seek clarification from the Hon'ble Court and accordingly decide these RTI
applications by following process as enumerated in the earlier paras by the
Commission in the interest of principles of natural justice. While disclosing the
information they should be cautious in taking a considerate view balancing right to
privacy, protection of national and commercial interest on one hand vis-à-vis larger
public interest. (Emphasis Supplied)

 
44. It is further observed that similar view has also been taken by the Division
Bench of the Commission in file bearing nos. CIC/VS/A/2013/001488 and
CIC/VS/A/2013/001805 dated 11.05.2017 wherein the Commission observed that
'Having considered the submissions of both the parties, the Commission observes
that since a similar issue is pending adjudication before the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in the matter of Central for 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. &Ors.
, it would be judicious to await the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court. However, on receipt of the final outcome

                                          8

 from the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter, the appellant shall be at liberty to
file second appeal afresh, if he so desires. The instant appeals are disposed of'."




The above decision is therefore applicable to the instant case and no separate line
of adjudication is warranted in the matter. The stipulations contained in File No.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 stands endorsed to the
Respondent CPIO with emphasis on para 41 & 43 supplied as above .



                      The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                         9