[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Naresh Kadyan vs Department Of Animal Husbandry, ... on 6 January, 2022


                                                       CIC/DOAHD/A/2020/672823

                                  के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                            बाबा गंगनाथ माग,मुिनरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या/ Second Appeal No. CIC/DOAHD/A/2020/672823

In the matter of:

Naresh Kadyan                                                  ... अपीलकता/Appellant
                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम

CPIO,                                                     ... ितवादीगण /Respondent
Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries Krishi
Bhawan, Rafi Ahmed Kidwai
Marg, Rajpath Area,
Central Secretariat,
New Delhi- 110001

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:

RTI Application filed on                   :   02.12.2019
CPIO replied on                            :   Not on Record
First Appeal filed on                      :   21.01.2020
First Appellate Authority order            :   Not on Record
Second Appeal received on                  :   05.06.2020
Date of Hearing                            :   04.01.2022




                                                                           Page 1 of 9
                                                     CIC/DOAHD/A/2020/672823

The following were present:

Appellant: Shri Naresh Kadyan participated in the hearing through intra-video
conferencing from Central Information Commission.

Respondent: Shri Narendra Kumar, CPIO and Under Secretary, Dept. of Animal
Husbandry and Smt. Prachi Jain, CPIO and Asst. Secretary, Animal Welfare Board
of India participated in the hearing through intra-video conferencing from Central
Information Commission.

                                    ORDER



Information sought:

The Appellant filed an RTI Application dated 02.12.2019 seeking information on
the following twenty four points:



      "Supply me the present status with concerned noting sheets, details about laid
      down as per 
section 38-A
 of PCA Act, all communications made & received
      related to following points:

      1. Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Dog Breeding and Marketing) Rules, 2017.

      2. Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Pet Shop) Rules, 2018

      3. Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Care and Maintenance of Case Property
          Animals) Rules, 2017

      4. Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Regulation of Livestock Markets) Rules,
          2017 but these Rules superannuation with fresh Draft, which is not converted
          as Rules.

      5. Draft Prevention of Cruelty Animals (Egg Laying Hens) Rules, 2019

      6. Draft Performing Animals (Registration)(Amendments) Rules, 2018

      7. Complete list of Advisories issued by AWBI, quoting sections of 
PCA Act
 along
          with their impact, status of implementation

      8. Complete list - details about all Notifications issued by Animal Welfare
          Division along with status of present situation

      9. Complete list of Infirmaries established & functional, all over India

      10. Complete list of SPCAs established & functional, all over India

      11. Complete list of Advisories issued by AWBI as per 
section 9(k)
 of PCA Act,
          1960 for Educational purposes

      12. Complete list of Regulations issued by AWBI as per 
section 10
 of PCA Act,

          1960


                                                                             Page 2 of 9

                                                       CIC/DOAHD/A/2020/672823


       13. Complete list of AWBI permanent officials with their designations, duties &
           functions along with their headquarters

       14. Status of AWBI publications as Animal Citizens with Jeev Saarthi, give details
           of last publications of both issues & reasons for stopping publication

       15. Complete details about appointment of present Secretary - Assistant Secretary
           of AWBI, describing their terms & conditions, allowing their headquarter in
           Delhi

       16. Supply me all copies of communications received & made with the parent
           Department of present Secretary, who belongs to AH of UP

       17. Complete details - list of TA - DA, claimed, sanctioned & disbursed of all Non
           officials members, all designated as HAWOs etc with all members of sub
           committees with the copies of their performance report

       18. Status of AWBI previous logo, details about copy rights with permission to use
           omitting AWBI

       19. Complete details - list of persons authorized to inspect Circuses etc as per
           
section 14
 of Performing Rules along with the report submitted by them as per
           
section 15
 of said Rule

       20. Date wise complete details of application with fee to display domesticated Yak
           for education purpose, submission of affidavit as per Secretary demand with
           final orders - decision on the application along with concerned noting sheets

       21. Complete list - details of power delegated under 37 of PCA Act

       22. Complete details about persons empowered under section 34 of PCA Act

       23. Complete details about permission granted as per section 27 & 28 of PCA Act

       24. Complete details about exemption under section 11(3) of PCA Act

       24. Feather chopping is covered under which section of 
PCA Act


Having not received any information from the CPIO, the Appellant filed a First
Appeal dated 21.01.2020, which has not been adjudicated by the First Appellate
Authority as per available records.



Grounds for Second Appeal:

The Appellant filed a Second Appeal
 u/s 19
 of the Act on the ground of non-
receipt of information from the Respondent.



Submissions made by Appellant and Respondent during Hearing:
The Appellant stated that he has not received any information from the Respondent
till date.



                                                                                Page 3 of 9


                                                       CIC/DOAHD/A/2020/672823

Ms. Prachi Jain submitted that the present RTI Application was transferred to the
Animal Welfare Board of India on 27.08.2020. He further submitted that the First
Appeal was also transferred to the concerned First Appellate Authority on
24.01.2020. She furthermore submitted that on 22.05.2021, the Appellant was
informed that information sought at point nos. 7, 9 to 24 of the RTI Application
pertains to Animal Welfare Board of India, who has been requested to directly
provide the information to the Appellant. She added that with regard to the
information sought at point nos. 1 to 6 and 8 of the RTI Application, the First
Appellate Authority had directed the CPIO to invite the Appellant to CPIO's office
with prior appointment and inspect the relevant records. She further added that the
Appellant has still not availed the offer of inspection.



Smt. Prachi Jain submitted that available information was already provided to the
Appellant in connection with another RTI Application containing same/identical
queries.



The Appellant interjected to state that he has not received any letter from the
Respondent till date. Upon queried by the Commission as to whether the Appellant
desires to inspect the relevant records by visiting the Respondent's office, he
replied in negative. He stated that he wants information from the Respondent
through speed post only.



Decision:

Upon perusal of the facts on record as well as on the basis of the proceedings
during the hearing, the Commission observes that appropriate reply has been
provided by the Respondent and the same is upheld. Further, the Commission
expresses severe displeasure against the conduct of the Appellant because initially
he had informed the Registry of this Bench to exempt his appearance in person and



                                                                          Page 4 of 9

                                                      CIC/DOAHD/A/2020/672823

had requested the Bench to grant permission to take part in the hearing virtually
(WhatsApp video/audio call), which was rejected by the Commission.
Subsequently, the Commission was generous enough to grant him an opportunity
to take part in the instant hearing from NIC Ahmedabad, which was booked from
1120 hrs to 1350 hrs (for 16 cases listed on 04.01.2022), yet, the Appellant chose
to take part in the proceedings, physically, thereby disrespecting the Commission's
efforts in scheduling the instant hearing. Be that as it may, the queries sought in the
instant RTI Application are not only lengthy but cryptic and unspecific. Therefore,
The Commission counsels the Appellant to be careful, mindful and watchful in
future while filing RTI Applications and not to flood the public authority by filing
umpteen numbers of RTI Applications. In this regard the Commission finds it
relevant to rely upon certain judgments of various Courts in India, wherein the
factum of misuse of the right to information has been highlighted adequately. The
excerpts of the same are as under:



   a. The Hon'ble High Court of Madras in the matter of Public Information
      Officer, Registrar (Administration) vs. B. Bharathi., W.P. No. 26781/2013
      dated 17.09.2014 has also given its opinion about vexatious litigation
      crippling the public authorities and held as follows:

             "... The action of the second respondent in sending numerous complaints
             and representations and then following the same with the RTI applications;
             that it cannot be the way to redress his grievance; that he cannot overload
             a public authority and divert its resources disproportionately while
             seeking information and that the dispensation of information should not
             occupy the majority of time and resource of any public authority, as it
             would be against the larger public interest..."

 
[Emphasis supplied]





                                                                               Page 5 of 9

                                                      CIC/DOAHD/A/2020/672823

   b. The Hon'ble High Court in the matter of 
Shail Sahni v. Sanjeev Kumar &
      Ors., W.P.(C
) 845/2014 has stated as under:


            "... Consequently, this Court deems it appropriate to refuse to exercise its
            writ jurisdiction. Accordingly, present petition is dismissed. This Court is
            also of the view that misuse of the 
RTI Act
 has to be appropriately dealt
            with, otherwise the public would lose faith and confidence in this "sunshine
            Act". A beneficial Statute, when made a tool for mischief and abuse must
            be checked in accordance with law..."

                                                                    [Emphasis supplied]

   c. In the matter of Rajni Mendiratta v. Dte. of Education (North West-B].,
      W.P.(C) no. 7911/2015, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi vide its order
      dated 08.10.2015 stated as under:

            "8. ... Though undoubtedly, the reason for seeking the information is not
            required to be disclosed but when it is found that the process of the law is
            being abused, the same become relevant. Neither the authorities created
            under the 
RTI Act
 nor the Courts are helpless if witness the provisions of
            law being abused and owe a duty to immediately put a stop thereto..."



In addition, the Commission would not be wrong to consider that the Appellant's
move to seek voluminous information is only to harass the public authority and not
with an intention to seek information. The Appellant rather appears to have
converted the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 as a tool of oppression/intimidation, which
the Commission discourages outrightly.



 
d. In the matter of 
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India vs.
      Shaunak H. Satya and Ors.
, AIR 2011 SC 3336, the Hon'ble Supreme
      Court of India has held as under:


            "... 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and
            existing. This is clear from a combined reading of Section 3 and the
            definitions of 'information' and 'right to information' under Clauses (f) and

            (j) of 
Section 2
 of the Act. If a public authority has any information in the
            form of data or analysed data, or abstracts, or statistics, an applicant may
            access such information, subject to the exemptions in 
Section 8
 of the Act.



                                                                                Page 6 of 9


                                                     CIC/DOAHD/A/2020/672823

           But where the information sought is not a part of the record of a public
           authority, and where such information is not required to be maintained
           under any law or the rules or regulations of the public authority, the Act
           does not cast an obligation upon the public authority, to collect or collate
           such non-available information and then furnish it to an applicant. The
           right to information is a fundamental right as enshrined in 
Article 10
 of the
           Constitution of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has declared in a
           plethora of cases that the most important value for the functioning of a
           healthy and well-informed democracy is transparency. However it is
           necessary to make a distinction in regard to information intended to bring
           transparency, to improve accountability and to reduce corruption, falling
           under 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and (c) and other information which may not have a
           bearing on accountability or reducing corruption. The competent
           authorities under the 
RTI Act
 will have to maintain a proper balance so
           that while achieving transparency, the demand for information does not
           reach unmanageable proportions affecting other public interests, which
           include efficient operation of public authorities and government,
           preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information and optimum use..."



e. In the matter of 
Central Board of Secondary Education & Anr. V. Aditya
  Bandopadhyay & Ors.
, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held as
  under:


  "33. ... 
The Act
 seeks to bring about a balance between two conflicting interests,
  as harmony between them is essential for preserving democracy. One is to bring
  about transparency and accountability by providing access to information under
  the control of public authorities. The other is to ensure that the revelation of
  information, in actual practice, does not conflict with other public interests
  which include efficient operation of the governments, optimum use of limited
  fiscal resources and preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information. The
  preamble to the Act specifically states that the object of the Act is to harmonise
  these two conflicting interests...

  ...

  37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and right to
  information are intended to be formidable tools in the hands of responsible
  citizens to fight corruption and to bring in transparency and accountability... ...
  Indiscriminate and impractical demands or directions under 
RTI Act
 for
  disclosure of all and sundry information (unrelated to transparency and
  accountability in the functioning of public authorities and eradication of
  corruption) would be counter-productive as it will adversely affect the efficiency
  of the administration and result in the executive getting bogged down with the




                                                                               Page 7 of 9

                                                       CIC/DOAHD/A/2020/672823

      non-productive work of collecting and furnishing information. 
The Act
 should
      not be allowed to be misused or abused, to become a tool to obstruct the national
      development and integration, or to destroy the peace, tranquility and harmony
      among its citizens. Nor should it be converted into a tool of oppression or
      intimidation of honest officials striving to do their duty. The nation does not want
      a scenario where 75% of the staff of public authorities spends 75% of their time
      in collecting and furnishing information to applicants instead of discharging
      their regular duties. The threat of penalties under the 
RTI Act
 and the pressure
      of the authorities under the 
RTI Act
 should not lead to employees of a public
      authorities prioritizing 'information furnishing', at the cost of their normal and
      regular duties..." [Emphasis supplied]


Keeping in view of the aforesaid observations, the Commission sternly cautions
the Appellant to use his right to information in a judicious manner.
With the above observations, the instant Second Appeal is dismissed.
Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.

                      The Appeal, hereby, stands dismissed.



                                        Amita Pandove (अिमता पांडव)
                                        Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
                                         दनांक / Date: 05.01.2022


Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत ित)


B. S. Kasana (बी. एस. कसाना)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26105027





                                                                                 Page 8 of 9

                                             CIC/DOAHD/A/2020/672823

Addresses of the parties:

1. The First Appellate Authority (FAA)
Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries Krishi Bhawan,
Rafi Ahmed Kidwai Marg, Rajpath Area,
Central Secretariat, New Delhi- 110001


2. The Central Public Information Officer
Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries Krishi Bhawan,
Rafi Ahmed Kidwai Marg, Rajpath Area,
Central Secretariat, New Delhi- 110001


3. Mr. Naresh Kadyan





                                                             Page 9 of 9