[Cites 
16
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


K V C Janaki Rama Rao vs Reserve Bank Of India on 30 May, 2022


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                            के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                     Central Information Commission
                        बाबा गंगनाथ माग,मुिनरका
                      Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                      नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या/Second Appeal No. CIC/RBIND/A/2020/127103

Mr. KVC Janaki Rama Rao                                  ... अपीलकता/Appellant
(Canara Bank)
                                   VERSUS
                                    बनाम
CPIO                                                     ... ितवादी/Respondent
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Supervision, Centre-1
World Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade,
Colaba, Mumbai-400005

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:-

RTI : 22-05-2019            FA    : 12-02-2020          SA       : 15-09-2020
                                                        Hearing : 28.09.2020,
                                                        23.10.2020,
CPIO : 29-01-2020           FAO : 05-03-2020
                                                        02.02.2021, 19-05-
                                                        2022

                                 ORDER

1.     The instant matter was lastly listed before the Commission on 02.02.2021
vide which the Commission had observed that "The Commission after adverting
to the facts and circumstances of the case, hearing both parties and perusal of
records, observes that the issue of disclosing financial statements, inspection
reports of banks including private and PSU banks was sub judice before the
Supreme Court. Both parties had agreed to wait until further directions of the
Supreme Court. Therefore, any direction of the Commission may preempt the
issue even though the appellant was not party to the case pending before the
Supreme Court (as revealed during the course of hearing). However, it may be
premature to adjudicate the matter under the circumstances. Accordingly, the
matter is adjourned".

2.     The instant matter is listed today for further hearing.



                                                                     Page 1 of 11


 Hearing:



3.    The appellant was represented through Shri Elango Subramaniam,
Divisional Manager who attended the hearing through video-conferencing. The
respondent, Shri Abhay Kumar, General Manager & CPIO along with Shri
Dayanand, Assistant Legal Advisor attended the hearing through video-
conferencing. The original RTI applicant was not present despite notice.

4.    The written submissions of the respondent are taken on record.

5.    The representative of the appellant submitted that the "RBI has, under its
Master Circular on Prudential norms on Income Recognition Asset
Classification and Provisioning pertaining to Advances advised the Banks either
to make full provision as per the extant guidelines or write-off such categories
of bad and doubtful debts which were chargeable to income tax and claim
applicable tax benefits by evolving appropriate methodology in consultation
with their auditors/tax consultants. In the subject matter, the appellant has not
written off the accounts furnished by the CPIO in the list as envisaged by the
RBI in the above said circular. He further submitted that in tune with the said
RBI guidelines and to avail the tax benefits, Bank has put in place a Policy with
respect to the Doubtful and Loss assets. The accounts which are enumerated
under the list sent to the appellant under subject letter of CPIO have been fully
provided for at Head Office level as per the extant RBI guidelines. All these
accounts are still accounted for and outstanding in the books of the branches of
the Bank as Non-Performing Assets. Bank is actively pursuing for recovery in
these accounts under the provisions of the SARFAESI Act, RDB Act or the
IBC, 2016. Hence these accounts are not falling under the ambit of the
information sought by the applicant. He stated that 
Section 8(1) (d)
 of the RTI
Act postulates that there shall be no obligation to give any information, the
disclosure of which would harm the competitive position of a third party, unless
the competent authority is satisfied that larger public interest warrants the
disclosure of such information".

6.    The respondent submitted that the RTI applicant has specifically sought
names and addresses of corporate houses/others whose loan have been written
off exceeding Rs. 50 crores bank-wise and year-wise. As the appellant bank has
reported these details under the CRILC, the same is part of records maintained
by RBI and liable to be disclosed by RBI in accordance with 
RBI Act
. Further,
as per Jayantilal Mistry's case, complete information can be disclosed to the
RTI applicant.



                                                                       Page 2 of 11


 Decision:

7.     The Commission, after hearing the submissions of both the parties and
after perusal of records, observes that the RTI applicant Shri D C Gupta had
sought information regarding "Total amount of bad loans written off each
financial year beginning from 2013-14 to 2018-19 by various banks; Name(s) of
the corporate houses/others with complete address of their establishments
whose loans have been written off exceeding Rs 50 crore and above bank wise
and year wise from 2013-14 to 2018-19" The CPIO, Reserve Bank of India had
issued notice under 
Section 11(1)
 and 
11(3)
 to the bank w.r.t disclosure of
information regarding 'Amount technically/prudentially Written Off is more
than Rs. 50 crore, as reported under Central Repository of Information on Large
Credits (CRILC) by bank as on March 2015, March 2016, March 2017, March
2018 and March 2019'. Aggrieved by the decision of the CPIO, the said bank
had filed first appeal with the First Appellate Authority. But the FAA had also
dismissed the first appeal of the bank summarily. Being aggrieved with the
order of the FAA, bank had filed second appeal before this Commission.

8.     The bank has categorically contested that the CPIO had informed that he
intends to provide the List of borrower-wise Technical/Prudential Write Offs
accounts which was not sought by the original RTI applicant. Hence the order
of CPIO and FAA to provide Technically Written Off accounts is beyond the
jurisdiction of CPIO/FAA. The appellant further contested that Bank is actively
pursuing for recovery in these accounts under the provisions of the SARFAESI
Act, RDB Act or the IBC, 2016. Hence these accounts are not falling under the
ambit of the information sought by the applicant.

9.     The Commission takes note of the submissions made by the Bank that
large amount of data relating to its clients including their identity, financial
transactions etc. of bank is shared with the regulator, without any redaction or
withholding the information, in good faith that these will be objectively
analysed in discharge of their statutory obligations to make fair judgment on
their functioning without affecting their competitive position. To this extent,
there is an element of trust and confidence in sharing the data, both financial
and operational, between the RBI and the bank. The information and data of the
clients in the hands of Bank also has the element of trust and confidence that
such data will not be disclosed or shared against their right to
privacy/commercial interest.

10. The Commission further takes note of the submissions made by the Bank
that the information, proposed to be disclosed is in the nature of credit
information and the same was supplied to the Reserve Bank of India in
fiduciary capacity as the Regulator under the provisions of the Banking

                                                                      Page 3 of 11

 Regulation Act as well as Master Circular on Prudential norms on Income
Recognition Asset Classification and provisioning pertaining to Advances. The
large amount of data relating to its clients including their identity, personal
details etc. is shared with the regulator, without any redaction or withholding
the information, in good faith that these will be objectively analysed in
discharge of their statutory obligations to make fair judgment on their
functioning without affecting their competitive position.To this extent, there is
an element of trust and confidence in sharing the data, both financial and
operational, between the RBI and the bank. The information and data of the
clients in the hands of Bank also has the element of trust and confidence that
such data will not be disclosed or shared against their right to
privacy/commercial interest.

11. Keeping in view the broader nature of business carried out between a
customer and the bank, the Commission takes note of the observations passed
by the Supreme Court in 
Central Board Of Sec. Education &Anr. vs Aditya
Bandopadhyay & Ors
 [2011 (8) SCC 497] vide order dated 09.08.2011
examined and explained the expression 'fiduciary relationship', and have
illustrated a few relationships where parties were involved in an act of fiduciary
capacity including 'customers' in the following words:


        "20. The term `fiduciary' and `fiduciary relationship' refer to different
        capacities and relationship, involving a common duty or obligation. 20.1)
        Black's Law Dictionary (7th Edition, Page 640) defines `fiduciary
        relationship' thus:



      A relationship in which one person is under a duty to act for the benefit of
      the other on matters within the scope of the relationship. Fiduciary
      relationships - such as trustee-beneficiary, guardian-ward, agent-
      principal, and attorney-client - require the highest duty of care. Fiduciary
      relationships usually arise in one of four situations : (1) when one person
      places trust in the faithful integrity of another, who as a result gains
      superiority or influence over the first, (2) when one person assumes
      control and responsibility over another, (3) when one person has a duty
      to act for or give advice to another on matters falling within the scope of
      the relationship, or (4) when there is a specific relationship that has
      traditionally been recognized as involving fiduciary duties, as with a
      lawyer and a client or a stockbroker and a customer."



      "39. The term "fiduciary" refers to a person having a duty to act for the
      benefit of another, showing good faith and candour, where such other
      person reposes trust and special confidence in the person owing or

                                                                       Page 4 of 11

       discharging the duty. The term "fiduciary relationship" is used to
      describe a situation or transaction where one person (beneficiary) places
      complete confidence in another person (fiduciary) in regard to his affairs,
      business or transaction(s). The term also refers to a person who holds a
      thing in trust for another (beneficiary). The fiduciary is expected to act in
      confidence and for the benefit and advantage of the beneficiary, and use
      good faith and fairness in dealing with the beneficiary or the things
      belonging to the beneficiary. If the beneficiary has entrusted anything to
      the fiduciary, to hold the thing in trust or to execute certain acts in regard
      to or with reference to the entrusted thing, the fiduciary has to act in
      confidence and is expected not to disclose the thing or information to any
      third party."



While taking into consideration the fact that the customers give their financial
information to the banks in confidence and with complete faith that may not be
divulged as a result of disclosure by others, the following observations passed
by the Supreme Court in 
Bihar Public Service Commission v. Saiyed Hussain
Abbas Rizwi and Anr.
[ (2012) 13 SCC 61] may be relied upon:




      "The satisfaction has to be arrived at by the authorities objectively and
      the "consequences of such disclosure have to be weighed with regard to
      the circumstances of a given case. The decision has to be based on
      objective satisfaction recorded for ensuring that larger public interest
      outweighs unwarranted invasion of privacy or other factors stated in the
      provision. Certain matters, particularly in relation to appointment, are
      required to be dealt with great confidentiality. The information may come
      to knowledge of the authority as a result of disclosure by others who give
      that information in confidence and with complete faith, integrity and
      fidelity. Secrecy of such information shall be maintained, thus, bringing it
      within the ambit of fiduciary capacity. Similarly, there may be cases
      where the disclosure has no relationship to any public activity or interest
      or it may even cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of the individual.
      All these protections have to be given their due implementation as they
      spring from statutory exemptions. It is not a decision simpliciter between
      private interest and public interest. It is a matter where a constitutional
      protection is available to a person with regard to the right to privacy.
      Thus, the public interest has to be construed while keeping in mind the
      balance factor between right to privacy and right to information with the
      purpose sought to be achieved and the purpose that would be served in


                                                                         Page 5 of 11

       the larger public interest, particularly when both these rights emerge
      from the constitutional values under the Constitution of India."



As emphasized by the Supreme Court in the judgment of Central Public
Information Officer, Supreme Court of 
India vs. Subhash Chandra Agarwal

in its judgment dated 13.11.2019, right to privacy and right to information have
to be treated as co-equals and none can take precedence over the other, rather a
balance needs to be struck. The following observations may also be relied upon
in that regard:




      "42. Privacy, it is uniformly observed in K.S. Puttaswamy (supra), is
      essential for liberty and dignity. Therefore, individuals have the need to
      preserve an intrusion-free zone for their personality and family. This
      facilitates individual freedom. On the question of invasion of personal
      liberty, the main judgment has referred to a three-fold requirement in the
      form of - (i) legality, which postulates the existence of law (RTI Act in the
      present case); (ii) need, defined in terms of a legitimate State aim; and

      (iii) proportionality, which ensures a rational nexus between the objects
      and the means to be adopted to achieve them. The third requirement, we
      would observe, is achieved in the present case by 
Sections 8(1)(j)
 and 
11

      of the RTI Act and the RTI Act cannot be faulted on this ground. 
The RTI
      Act
 also defines the legitimate aim, that is a public interest in the
      dissemination of information which can be confidential or private (or
      held in a fiduciary relationship) when larger public interest or public
      interest in disclosure outweighs the protection or any possible harm or
      injury to the interest of the third party."



Further in 
K.S. Puttaswamy and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors.
 [(2017) 10
SCC 1], the Supreme Court observed as under:




      "623. An individual has a right to protect his reputation from being
      unfairly harmed and such protection of reputation needs to exist not only
      against falsehood but also certain truths. It cannot be said that a more
      accurate judgment about people can be facilitated by knowing private
      details about their lives - people judge us badly, they judge us in haste,
      they judge out of context, they judge without hearing the whole story and
      they judge with hypocrisy. Privacy lets people protect themselves from
      these troublesome judgments."



                                                                        Page 6 of 11


 
12.   In view of the above, the Commission is of the view that these judicial
pronouncements have to be factored while deliberating all the claims of the
applicant for complete disclosure which may include inadvertent disclosure of
financial, transactional and operational data of the clients of the Bank etc.
Further, in 
Naresh Trehan vs Rakesh Kumar Gupta [W.P.(C
) 85/2010 & CM
Nos.156/2010 & 5560/2011], the Delhi High Court made the following
observations:




      "...It is, thus, essential that information relating to business affairs,
      which is considered to be confidential by an assessee must remain so,
      unless it is necessary in larger public interest to disclose the same. If the
      nature of information is such that disclosure of which may have the
      propensity of harming one's competitive interests, it would not be
      necessary to specifically show as to how disclosure of such information
      would, in fact, harm the competitive interest of a third party. In order to
      test the applicability of 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the Act it is necessary to first
      and foremost determine the nature of information and if the nature of
      information is confidential information relating to the affairs of a private
      entity that is not obliged to be placed in public domain, then it is
      necessary to consider whether its disclosure can possibly have an adverse
      effect on third parties."



 
The Supreme Court while deciding upon issues relating to personal
information of an individual in terms of his income tax returns passed the
following observations in 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande v. Central
Information Commr.
 [(2013) 1 SCC 212] :




      "12. The petitioner herein sought for copies of all memos, show-cause
      notices and censure/punishment awarded to the third respondent from his
      employer and also details viz. movable and immovable properties and
      also the details of his investments, lending and borrowing from banks and
      other financial institutions. Further, he has also sought for the details of
      gifts stated to have been accepted by the third respondent, his family
      members and friends and relatives at the marriage of his son. The
      information mostly sought for finds a place in the income tax returns of
      the third respondent. The question that has come up for consideration is:

      whether the abovementioned information sought for qualifies to be
      "personal information" as defined in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI
      Act.



                                                                        Page 7 of 11


       13. We are in agreement with the CIC and the courts below that the
      details called for by the petitioner i.e. copies of all memos issued to
      the third respondent, show cause notices and orders of
      censure/punishment etc. are qualified to be personal information as
      defined in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act. The performance
      of an employee/officer in an organization is primarily a matter
      between the employee and the employer and normally those aspects
      are governed by the service rules which fall under the expression
      "personal information", the disclosure of which has no relationship
      to any public activity or public interest. On the other hand, the
      disclosure of which would cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of
      that individual. Of course, in a given case, if the Central Public
      Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer of the
      Appellate Authority is satisfied that the larger public interest
      justifies the disclosure of such information, appropriate orders
      could be passed but the petitioner cannot claim those details as a
      matter of right.

      14. The details disclosed by a person in his income tax returns are
      "personal information" which stand exempted from disclosure under
      clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, unless involves a larger
      public interest and the Central Public Information Officer or the
      State Public Information Officer or the Appellate Authority is
      satisfied that the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of
      such information."



The aforementioned observations make it clear that the data has been shared by
the individuals with the Income Tax Department which is seeking such
information as a statutory authority but while analyzing and assessing their
income keeps this data secured in the fiduciary capacity and hence it is
protected from disclosure. It is applicable not only for individuals but for other
legal entities recognizable under 
Income Tax Act
. Further, it has been observed
that the information in the hands of public authority even in the discharge of
statutory obligations is protected under fiduciary relationship.



13. There are apparently two set of such information which have been shared
by the bank with the regulator under statutory obligation. First is the
information/data of clients relating to their business/commercial operations,
financial transactions, business and commercial strategy which is shared by
clients with financial institutions in full trust and confidence and is held by them
in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure under the 
RTI Act
 in their
hands. Second set is the information relating to business strategy, decisions,
transactions, other operational data etc. of financial institution which may have
bearing on their competitive position and also enjoys the exemption from

                                                                         Page 8 of 11

 disclosure in their hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise, under the 
RTI
Act
. The Commission is of the view that the exemption of disclosure of certain
information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of financial
institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in good
faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligations. This aspect is not
the ratio of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's judgment and
decision of the regulator to consider redacting such data/information while
disclosing the reports is to be aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts covering such aspects.

14. The Commission further observes that orders simpliciter irrespective of
the different objections raised by the appellant bank apparently lacked
application of mind or reasons on the part of the CPIO. Rejection or acceptance
of the specific objections raised by them was not spelt out in the order which
have been passed without giving an opportunity of hearing to them. The
Commission further observes that the CPIO is at best free to take decisions on
disclosure of information as per provision of 
RTI Act, 2005
 giving a reasoned
orders on the objections filed. The CPIO while issuing notice under 
Section 11

of the RTI Act has given the opportunity to the Appellant Bank to file their
objections, if any, against disclosure of information sought but has not found it
necessary to give them an opportunity of hearing. While not doing so, the CPIO
has not passed any reasoned order covering his deliberations on their objections,
his understanding of law or jurisprudence in deciding specific objections, in
favor of disclosure etc. Order passed by the CPIO is cryptic, without any
reference to objections raised by the Appellant Bank. Similarly, the FAA
instead of passing a speaking order have also given a cryptic order to the
Appellant Bank. The CPIO and the FAA are expected to apply their mind
before issuing the order of intent of disclosing the information. Further, no
opportunity of personal hearing was given to the appellant nor speaking order
have been passed by FAA for not giving opportunity of hearing or elaborating
reasons for accepting /not accepting their objections in his decision in the
appeal. The Commission is of the view that every objection should be dealt and
rejected/accepted with a reason and reasons for not giving opportunity of
personal hearing should be well reasoned too in view of wider implications.

15. The Commission observes that rightful claims of the RTI applicant has to
be adjudicated in the light of specific objections filed by the Institution, various
judicial pronouncements of Hon'ble Supreme Court and High Courts providing
guidance on such matters. Opportunity of hearing should necessarily be
provided and orders passed by the CPIO and the FAA otherwise should be
reasoned, speaking and clear. In the present case, such order should enumerate

                                                                         Page 9 of 11

 the principles for disclosure or non-disclosure of details of top 100 accounts of
loan defaulters or various types of data, personal information, commercially
sensitive information of clients or institution, specifically excluded disclosures
under various Acts, etc.

16. The Commission has also taken a detailed view in file nos.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 & Ors. dated 05.05.2022 wherein issues of
redaction, ratio of Jayantilal Mistry case and other related issues are discussed
in detail. Perusal of the relevant paragraphs in Jayantilal Mistry judgment make
it clear that the fundamental rights enshrined upon the citizens in form of right
to information are not absolute and that the right to information may not draw
precedence over right to privacy. Therefore, the Courts need to strike a balance
between the rights as well as protections guaranteed to a citizen under 
Article 19

of the Constitution. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held that the disclosure
of information relating to banks and financial institutions may be allowed taking
into account the circumstances and nature of information sought for and not in a
blanket manner. The Commission advised the CPIO to consider taking the
relevant references from the said order while deciding the cases.

17. The Commission further observed that the appellant bank has specifically
taken a defense that the accounts which are enumerated under the list sent to
them under subject letter of CPIO have been fully provided at Head Office level
as per the extant RBI guidelines. All these accounts are still accounted for and
outstanding in the books of the branches of the Bank as Non-Performing Assets
and the Bank is actively pursuing for recovery in these accounts under the
provisions of the SARFAESI Act, RDB Act or the IBC, 2016. Hence these
accounts are not falling under the ambit of the information sought by the
applicant and exempted under 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act.

18. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of the
CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care
has to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making
reasoned order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and
later in the hands of FAA, if any appeal is preferred.

19. Hence, with these observations the Commission partially allowed the
second appeal of the appellant bank with the extent that the information sought
by the RTI applicant on point no. 2 of the RTI application is exempted from
disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(d)
, (e) and 8(1)(j) of the 
RTI Act
, the disclosure
of which would affect the competitive position of the bank and also personal
information of third party.

20. With the above observations, the order passed by the CPIO and FAA in
this matter is set aside and the RTI application specifically on point no. 1 is

                                                                      Page 10 of 11

 being remanded to the CPIO for adjudication afresh, as the gross amount in the
matter (as sought on point no. 1 of the RTI application) can always be furnished
to the applicants under the 
RTI Act
. The above directions of the Commission
should be complied within a period of 30 days from the date of receipt of this
order. In case, the appellant/applicant is aggrieved with the order of the CPIO,
they are at the liberty to file first appeal before the First Appellate Authority and
afterwards second appeal before the Commission.

21. With the above observations, the appeal is disposed of.

22. Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.



                                                             नीरज कु मार गु ा)
                                         Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरज           ा
                                                                 सूचना आयु )
                                       Information Commissioner (सू

                                                          दनांक / Date : 19-05-2022
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)


S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),
(011-26105682)



Addresses of the parties:
1.   CPIO
     Reserve Bank of India
     Department of Supervision, Centre-1
     World Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade,
     Colaba, Mumbai-400005

2.    Mr. KVC Janaki Ram Rao

3.    Mr. D.C. Gupta (Original Appellant)





                                                                         Page 11 of 11