[Cites 
17
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Apar Gupta vs Ministry Of Home Affairs on 31 January, 2022


                                   के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                          Central Information Commission
                               बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                           नई द ली,
                                 ली New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या / Second Appeal No. CIC/MHOME/A/2021/638510

Shri Apar Gupta                                               ...   अपीलकता /Appellant
Through: Shri Abhinav Sekhri-Advocate
                               VERSUS/बनाम

PIO, Ministry of Home Affairs                           ...   ितवादीगण /Respondent
Through: Shri Shailendra Vikram Singh - DS,
CIS-I Division

Date of Hearing                       :    13.01.2022
Date of Decision                      :    28.01.2022
Chief Information Commissioner        :    Shri Y. K. Sinha

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on               :   28.12.2018
PIO replied on                         :   25.01.2019
First Appeal filed on                  :   15.02.2019
First Appellate Order on               :   29.03.2019
2ndAppeal/complaint received on        :   25.08.2021

 Information sought
 and background of the case:

 A batch of six Second Appeals dated 06.05.2019 filed by Apar Gupta against the
 Ministry of Home were heard by the Commission on 17.05.2021 as appeals no.:

 CIC/MHOME/A/2019/122458, CIC/MHOME/A/2019/122459,
 CIC/MHOME/A/2019/122457, CIC/MHOME/A/2019/122456,
 CIC/MHOME/A/2019/122450, CIC/MHOME/A/2019/122455 where it was held as
 under:

    "The arguments of both parties are heard at length. Given the facts discussed
    above, the Commission is not convinced with the justification provided by the
    Respondent for denial of information, particularly because Respondent has not
    established how the provisions of 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of the RTI Act are attracted in
    disclosure of mere statistical information. In fact, perusal of records indicate
    that the Respondent has claimed three exemptions under Section 8(1)(a), (g) and

    (h) of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 without establishing any connection of the same with
    the facts of the cases at hand. The reliance placed by the Respondent on the
    CIC decision No. CIC/VS/A/2014/000378/SB dated 02.09.2015 in the case of
    Shri Amitabh Narayan, is also not applicable in this case, since information




                                                                                 Page 1 of 13

   sought in that case is different from the above mentioned six appeals. Since the
  Appellant has not sought any personally identifiable information in respect of
  any individual, or even the locations in which the orders under 
Section 69
 of the
  IT Act were passed, there is no question of endange
                                                  endangering
                                                           ring the life or physical
  safety of any person. The information sought by the Appellant does not seek
  disclosure of any assistance given in confidence for law enforcement and
  security purposes either. Hence, the case cited by the Respondent is clearly
  distinguishable
      inguishable to the facts of these appeals. Oral submissions made by the
  Respondent during the course of hearing are unconvincing and fail to satisfy the
  Commission. It appears that the FAA has also not decided the cases at hand
  with due diligence and summa
                            summarily
                                    rily disposed off the appeals, without dealing
  with the facts in any detail.



  Under the circumstances at hand, the Commission finds that the six appeals
  have not been adjudicated appropriately. The matters are thus remanded to the
  FAA/Joint Secretary/CIS,MHA,
                            MHA, Sh. Ashutosh Agnihotri, to revisit the cases and
  re-examine
     examine the issues raised, deciding the cases with a reasoned speaking
  order after hearing both parties. The Respondent is directed to submit a copy of
  the FAA's revised order before the Commission b byy 31.07.2021 on providing a
  copy of the same to the Appellant.

                          Appellant."



In compliance with the order of the CIC, the FAA passed an order dated 30.07.2021,
                                                                       30.07.2021
focussing the decision on the following two aspects:



The FAA went ahead and decided the above aspects with the following observations:



                                                                              Page 2 of 13


 The PIO had averred during the hearing held before the FAA:



Based on the PIO's inputs, the FAA held in the decision dated 30.07.2021 as follows:



                                                                           Page 3 of 13


 Aggrieved
 ggrieved by the decision of the First Appellat
                                         Appellate Authority,, the Appellant filed another
Second Appeal dated 23.08.2021 with the Commission with the following prayer: prayer
   a. Issue appropriate orders or directions to the CPIO to provide information
   sought at Paragraph  aph 12 above, in exercise of its powers under 
Section
   19(8)(a)(i)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005;

   b. Direct the public authority to make necessary changes to its practices in
   relation to the maintenance, management and destruction of records, such
   that aggregate and anonymised data is available, in exercise of this
   Hon'ble Commission's powers under 
Section 19(8)(a)(iv)
 of the Right to
   Information Act, 2005; and
   c. Such other relief as the Hon'ble Commission deems fit.



However, during the pendency of the Second Appeal, the Appellant challenged the
order of the First Appellate Authority dated 30.07.2021 before the High Court of
Delhi vide writ petition No. 12584/2021 dated 28.10.2021 and sought the following
relief:



The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi which vide its order in Writ Petition (C) 12584/2021
decided on 02.12.2021 held as under:



                                                                                Page 4 of 13


       "4. Learned counsel appearing for the Commission [i.e., the Central Information
    Commission] on instructions states that all endeavour shall be made to dispose of the
    pending appeal with expedition and that in any case, the same shall be decided within a
    period of eight weeks from today. The statement so made is recorded and accepted.

    5. Mr. Trideep Pais, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has further prayed for
    permission being accorded to place additional material before the Commission for its
    consideration in support of the prayers as addressed and made in the pending appeal.

    6. The prayer made is acceded to. The Court leaves it open for the petitioner to file such
    further additional material as it may chose to do in support of the appeal which is
    pending.

    7. Accordingly, the petition along with pending application stands disposed of.

    8. Though, needless to state, it is clarified that this order shall not be treated as an
    expression of any opinion by the Court on the merits or otherwise of the prayers made
    here and that consequently all rights and contentions of parties are kept open."



With the above background, the instant Second Appeal filed on 23.08.2021 was
scheduled for hearing on 13.01.2022.



Facts emerging in Course of Hearing:

A written submission has been received from the Appellant vide letter dated
07.12.2021 attached therewith is the order dated 02.12.2021 passed by the High
Court of Delhi, the Writ Petition No. 12584/2021 dated 28.10.2021, counter affidavit
filed by the Respondent - MHA etc.

The Appellant has submitted four specific prayers before this Commission through
the written submission dated 07.12.2021, which are:

   A. Setting aside the order dated 30.07.2021 passed by the FAA;
   B. The CPIO, MHA belatedly raised the plea that the information sought by the
      Appellant did not exist as it was periodically destroyed. The Appellant
      contended that the PIO's plea was belated and not supported by material in the
      form of documents or affidavits. Such act of destruction of records has been
      alleged as illegal in view of pendency of RTI proceedings;
   C. The Appellant has averred that, though no material was provided by the
      Respondent in support of his claim of destruction of records by weeding out,
      under 
Section 69
 of the Information Technology Act 2000, no policy for
      destruction of data was filed, nor any affidavit of the concerned official placed
      on record and yet the submissions were accepted by the Ld. FAA. Hence, the
      Appellant has prayed that under 
Section 19(8)(a)(i)
 of the Right to Information
      Act, 2005 the public authority should be directed to take any such steps as
      may be necessary to secure compliance with the provisions of this Act and
      direct disclosure of similar information for a period of time that is available
      with the Ld. CPIO, MHA;

   D. Appellant has sought issuance of guidelines to prevent instances of destruction
      of information that is the subject matter of RTI proceedings to occur to the
      detriment of the parties concerned in the future. The Appellant has cited the
      provisions of 
Section 19(8)(a)(iv)
 of the RTI Act seeking that the Respondent be
      directed to prepare and publish clear document destruction policies and
      installing measures to prevent destruction of material which is the subject of





                                                                                   Page 5 of 13

       an information request during lis pendens.



The Appellant has also submitted a comparative table of the Information Technology
(Procedure and Safeguards for Interception, Monitoring and Decryption Decrypt   of
Information) Rules, 2009 and Rule 419A of the Telegraph Rules, 1951 highlighting
the differences in the provisions relating to destruction of records.



The Respondent- MHA has sent a brief submission dated 11.01.2022, reiterating that
MHA does not maintain any statistical information/data, related to lawful
interception & monitoring and that the desired information is not available as on date
and hence the same cannot be provided.



In order to ensure social distancing and prevent the spread of the pandemic, COVID-

                                                                              COVID
19, hearing was scheduled through audio conference after giving prior notice to both
the parties. Both parties
                       rties are heard at length and have made their respective
submissions, in line with the above mentioned points. The Appellant sought some
time to submit a brief rejoinder, which has been allowed. The relevant extracts of the
rejoinder submitted by the Appellant are as follows:



Decision:

Perusal of records in the light of the averments placed forth by the parties with
respect to the Second Appeal seeks to challenge the order dated 30.07.2021 passed
by the FAA, whereby
                 reby informat
                      information sought by the Appellant was denied on the ground
that it does not exist on record and has been weeded out as per process of law. In
order to adjudicate the issues raised in this matter, it will be worthwhile to address
them in the following
                    g manner:



I. At the very outset, it is pertinent to note the following provisions of law, which
have been mentioned and impugned in this case:

   i). Rule 419A(18) of the Telegraph Rules, 1951: Records pertaining to such
   directions for interception and of intercepted messages shall be destroyed by the
   relevant competent authority and the authorized Security and Law Enforcement
   Agencies every six months unless these are, or likely to be, required for functional
   requirements.



                                                                             Page 6 of 13


    ii). Rule 419A(19) of the Telegraph Rules, 1951: The service providers shall destroy
   records pertaining to directions for interception of message within two months of
   discontinuance of the interception of such messages and in doing so they shall
   maintain extreme secrecy.



   iii). Rule 23 of the Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for
   Interception, Monitoring and Decryption of Information) Rules, 2009
      Destruction of records of interception or monitoring or decryption of
      information--

      (1) Every record, including electronic records pertaining to such directions
      for interception or monitoring or decryption of information and of
      intercepted or monitored or decrypted information shall be destroyed by
      the security agency in every six months except in a case where such
      information is required, or likely to be required for functional
      requirements.

      (2) Save as otherwise required for the purpose of any ongoing investigation,
      criminal complaint or legal proceedings, the intermediary or person in-

      charge of computer resources shall destroy records pertaining to directions
      for interception of information within a period of two months of
      discontinuance of the interception or monitoring or decryption of such
      information and in doing so they shall maintain extreme secrecy.



II. The Appellant has submitted additional material in the form of a written
submission dated 07.12.2021, and placed reliance on an affidavit dated 21.02.2019
submitted by the Director, MHA before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in WP(Crl.) No.
1/2019 and five other connected matters, challenging the constitutional validity of
part of the 
Section 69
 of the Information Technology Act, 2000, 
Section 5(2)
 of the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and Rule 4 of the Information Technology(Procedure and
Safeguards for Interception, Monitoring and Decryption of Information) Rules 2009.
The petitions are still pending before the Apex Court, but pleadings in the case
provide detailed insight into the matter under challenge.

       In support of his contentions made in the affidavit, the deponent had attached
a copy of the order dated 20.12.2018 of the Union Home Secretary, whereby ten
Security and Intelligence agencies had been specified which were authorised to
intercept, monitor and decrypt any information generated, transmitted, received or
stored in any computer under 
Section 69(1)
 of the Information Technology Act, 2000
read with Rule 4 of the Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for
Interception, Monitoring and Decryption of Information) Rules 2009. It further
transpires from the detailed affidavit that in order to provide necessary safeguard, the
provisions of Section 419A of the Indian Telegraph Rules, 1951 are specifically
adhered to which allows lawful interception of phones under unavoidable
circumstances, upon obtaining necessary approval from the competent authority i.e.
the Union Home Secretary or the Home Secretary, as the case may be.



                                                                              Page 7 of 13


        A combined reading of the affidavit alongwith the order dated 20.12.2018
clarifies that the specified ten agencies as enlisted in the order are the only
agencies/organisations who were empowered to ut   utilise and
                                                           nd exercise the powers under

Section 69
 of the Information Technology Act, 2000, subject to approval of the
competent authority as per provisions of law, rules and SOP. No blanket permission
to any of the agencies for interception or monitoring or decrypti
                                                           decryption
                                                                   on is granted without
adequate justification and necessary approval of the competent authority. Thus, it
transpires from the contents of the detailed affidavit of the Director, MHA that the
specific ten security and intelligence agencies are    e the actual custodians
                                                                      cus         of the
information about the interception, monitoring and decryption of such information
related to surveillance and data is not held by the Respondent in this case.

       The affidavit also highlights that records pertaining to directions for
interception
          ion and of the intercepted messages are destroyed by the relevant competent
authority and the authorized Security and Law Enforcement agencies every six
months unless such data is required for functional requirement. In order to illustrate
the power of interception in larger national interest in preventing terrorism, drug
trafficking and busting of narcotic drugs racket, the deponent placed reliance on a
list of cases where major cases were detected/cracked by the use of the laid down
procedure of interception.

                    eption. The list of cases highlighted those specific instances where
information was not destroyed but was retained for necessary future functional
requirement, as specified in law.



III. Now dealing with the merits of the Second Appeal, it will be worthwhile
                                                                  worthw     to revisit
the information sought by the Appellant vide six RTI applications dated 28.12.2018,
which are as under:



                                                                              Page 8 of 13


 It is evident that the Appellant had vide RTI application dated 28.12.2018 sought
information pertaining to period between 01.01.2016 to 27.12.2018. The PIO's denial
of information invoking 
Section 8(1)(a)
, (g) and (h) of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 has already
been dealt with in the previous order dated 1 18.05.2021,
                                                .05.2021, passed by this Commission
and hence require no further discussion. In compliance of the Commission's order




                                                                           Page 9 of 13

 dated 18.05.2021, the FAA vide order dated 30.07.2021 declined disclosure of
information with the observation that the information sought by the Appellant is no
longer available on record, since such records are weeded out every six months, in
terms of 
Section 5(2)
 of Telegraph Act, 1885, 
Section 69
 of the Information
Technology Act, 2000, Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Interception,
Monitoring and Decryption of Information) Rules, 2009 and Rule 419A of the Indian
Telegraph Rules, 1951. It has also been noted by the FAA that being highly classified
information, minimal records are maintained and statistical data is not compiled or
maintained by the CIS Division, MHA. The FAA upheld the PIO's averments that the data
being subject to extant provisions of law, records pertaining to the period 2016-18 have been
weeded out and hence could not be provided.



Considering that such a plea about non existence/weeding out of records had not been taken
by the PIO vide the reply dated 25.01.2019, it has rightly been contended by the Appellant
vide submissions dated 07.12.2021 that the PIO's has raised the plea belatedly that the
information sought by the Appellant did not exist as it was periodically destroyed and
also has not supported the averment by material in the form of documents or
affidavits or policy for destruction of data.



While discussing the issue about dissemination of information, it is relevant to note
that as per the provisions of extant laws governing the data sought by the Appellant
which relates to 2016- 2018, such information could not have been readily available
on the date of filing of the RTI application, viz. 28.12.2018. Moreover, as has been
noted from the contents of the affidavit dated 21.02.2019 of the Director, MHA filed
before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in WP(Crl.) No. 1/2019, submitted on record by
the Appellant, the actual custodian of such information are the ten specified Security
and Intelligence agencies as mentioned in the MHA's order dated 20.12.2018. It is
interesting to note that the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in its decision dated 01.06.2012
in the case of 
Registrar of Companies & Ors. vs. Dharmendra Kumar Garg &
Anr.[WP(C
) 11271/2009 has discussed the scope and ambit of the "right to
information" in the following words:


      "...the right conferred by 
Section 3
 of the RTI Act, which is the
      substantive provision, means the right to information "accessible under
      the Act which is held by or under the control of any public authority and
      includes ..... ..... .....".

      27. It is not without any purpose that the Parliament took the trouble
      of defining ―right to information‖. Parliament does not undertake a
      casual or purposeless legislative exercise. The definition of "right to
      information" specifically qualifies the said right with the words:

         (1) "accessible under this Act", and;

         (2) "which is held by or under the control of any public authority".

      28. The information should, firstly, be accessible under this Act. This
      means that if there is information which is not accessible under this
      Act, there is no "right to information" in respect thereof.
      Consequently, there is no right to information in respect of information,
      which is exempted from disclosure under 
Section 8
 or 
Section 9
 of the
      RTI Act...

      31. In the context of the object of the 
RTI Act
, and the various
      provisions thereof, in my view, the said expression "held by or under




                                                                                 Page 10 of 13

      the control of any public authority" used in 
section 2(j)
 of the RTI Act
     deserves a wider and a more meaningful interpretation. The expression
     "Hold" is defined in the Black's Law dictionary, 6th Edition, inter alia, in
     the same way as "to keep" i.e. to retain, to maintain possession of, or
     authority over.

   34. From the above, it appears that the expression "held by" or
    "under the control of any public authority", in relation to "information",
    means that information which is held by the public authority under its
    control to the exclusion of others."



It is relevant to note the Apex Court's decision in the decision dated 09.08.2011 in
the case titled: 
Central Board Of Secondary Education &Anr. vs Aditya Bandopadhyay
& Ors.on
 this aspect:




      "34. When trying to ensure that the right to information does not conflict
   with several other public interests (which includes efficient operations of the
   governments, preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information, optimum
   use of limited fiscal resources, etc.), it is difficult to visualise and enumerate
   all types of information which require to be exempted from disclosure in public
   interest. The legislature has however made an attempt to do so. The
   enumeration of exemptions is more exhaustive than the enumeration of
   exemptions attempted in the earlier Act that is 
section 8
 of Freedom
   to Information Act, 2002. The Courts and Information Commissions enforcing
   the provisions of 
RTI Act
 have to adopt a purposive construction, involving a
   reasonable and balanced approach which harmonises the two objects of the
   Act, while interpreting 
section 8
 and the other provisions of the Act.



   35. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some misconceptions about the 
RTI
   Act
. 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and
   existing. This is clear from a combined reading of 
section 3
 and the definitions
   of `information' and `right to information' under clauses (f) and (j) of 
section 2
 of
   the Act. If a public authority has any information in the form of data or
   analysed data, or abstracts, or statistics, an applicant may access such
   information, subject to the exemptions in 
section 8
 of the Act. But where the
   information sought is not a part of the record of a public authority, and where
   such information is not required to be maintained under any law or the rules or
   regulations of the public authority, the Act does not cast an obligation upon the
   public authority, to collect or collate such non- available information and then
   furnish it to an applicant..."



The information sought in this case though not exempted under 
Section 8
 or 9 of the

RTI Act
, the same is not held by or under the control of the public authority in
question, as is evident from the above discussion. Such information falls within the
exclusive jurisdiction of the specified ten agencies as enlisted in the MHA's order
dated 20.12.2018, since these are the only agencies/organisations who were
empowered to utilise and exercise the powers under 
Section 69
 of the Information
Technology Act, 2000, subject to approval of the competent authority as per
provisions of law, rules and SOP. Therefore, in the light of the above decisions of the




                                                                                 Page 11 of 13

 respective Courts, the Respondent-CIS, MHA cannot be considered to be the actual
custodian of information nor responsible for dissemination of the information under
the purview of the 
RTI Act
.



IV. The Appellant in his rejoinder has mentioned that such information was
maintained by the Respondent and furnished in the past referring to the list of cases
submitted before the Apex Court with the affidavit dated 21.02.2019, highlighted
those specific instances where information was not destroyed. On reading the
provisions of Rule 419A(18) of the Telegraph Rules, 1951 and the Rule 23 of the
Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Interception, Monitoring and
Decryption of Information) Rules, 2009, it becomes clear that as exception to the
rules of destruction of records, some information is not destroyed but retained in
specific cases where such information is for necessary future functional requirement,
as specified in law. The request to obtain information was filed after two years from
the date of origin of the information and since there was no legal embargo in the form
of any Court order nor any pending investigation with respect to the data in question,
the same was destroyed in normal course, as per mandate of law. Thus the argument
about destruction of records during pendency of the RTI matter is not found to be
applicable in this case.



V. The Appellant contended that similar information had been provided in the past
referring to a copy of the Ministry of Home Affair's RTI response dated 25.05.2011 to
Shri Paras Nath Singh's RTI dated 24.02.2011, a copy of the Ministry of Home Affair's
RTI response dated 12.05.2014 to SFLC's RTI application dated 19.03.2014 and a
copy of Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad's reply to Unstarred Question No. 1443. The
argument of the Appellant is untenable in this case because in all of these instances,
the queries were limited and answered with an approximate figure. However, as is
evident in the case at hand, the rather large list of queries raised vide the six RTI
applications dated 28.12.2018 could not have been answered with approximate
figures.



Having discussed the various aspects of the case and the specific legal provisions
governing such confidential information sought by the Appellant, it is deemed
appropriate that the Respondent-PIO, Deputy Secretary, CIS Division, MHA shall
submit an affidavit on a non judicial stamp paper affirming that the MHA does not
maintain any statistical information/data, related to lawful interception & monitoring
and that the desired information is not available as on date and hence the same
cannot be provided to the Appellant. This affidavit should reach the Commission
within four weeks of receipt of this order, with a copy duly marked to the Appellant.
The Commission also admonishes the PIO for failing earlier in bringing out the fact
that the information sought by the Appellant is not available on record as it had
already been destroyed as per extant laws.

The instant appeal is disposed off with the above observations.



                                                           Y. K. Sinha (वाई.

                                                                          वाई. के . िस हा)
                                      Chief Information Commissioner (मु य सूचना आयु )




                                                                              Page 12 of 13

 Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स ािपत ित)

S. K. Chitkara (एस. के . िचटकारा)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26186535





                                    Page 13 of 13