[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


C M Nimje vs Central Water And Power Research ... on 22 May, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               के ीय सूचना आयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                            बाबागंगनाथमाग, मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/CWPRS/A/2022/653106

C M NIMJE                                               ......अपीलकता/Appellant

                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम
CPIO,
CENTRAL WATER AND POWER
RESEARCH STATION, RTI CELL,
KHADAKWASLA RS PO, SINGHAD
ROAD, PUNE-411024,
MAHARASHTRA.                                          .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                   :   19/05/2023
Date of Decision                  :   19/05/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on          :   28/05/2022
CPIO replied on                   :   07/06/2022
First appeal filed on             :   24/06/2022
First Appellate Authority order   :   26/07/2022
Second Appeal dated               :   01/10/2022

Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 28.05.2022 seeking the following
information:



                                        1


 "I) Kindly provide the list of employees who are working as legal assistant work as
well as clerical and administrative work in Admin Section, CWPRS, Pune.



2) Kindly provide DoPT Rules, CWPRS Office Order, File notings and Reasons for
allotment of Group-A table work / Administrative Works except legal work to the
legal assistant in CWPRS, Pune.



3) Kindly provide the updated file notings of Recruitment Rules of Superintendent
post and Chief Administrative Officer Post and also, certified copy of notice
circulated among the stakeholders in CWPRS, Pune for changing RR.



4) Kindly provide the DoPT rules and CWPRS rules for changing any Recruitment
Rules in personal interest in the CWPRS, Pune.



5) Kindly provide the file notings and all information regarding Committee for
Changing the Recruitment Rules of Ministerial cadre post and Chief Administrative
Officer post in CWPRS, Pune.



6) Kindly provide the File Notings for changing the Recruitment Rules of legal
Assistant post in CWPRS. Pune, which was composite method, post as per UPSC
rules and provisions. And also, kindly provide the inspection for Files regarding
notification of legal Assistant pertains to filling up the post on deputation
/absorption basis before 2nd October 2016.



7) Kindly provide the DoPT / UPSC rules for exemption of desirable qualification in
the recruitment of legal assistant post in CWPRS, Pune.



8) Kindly provide the DoPT rules for misleading /bluffing to the higher authorities
in CWPRS, Pune by some officer with ill-motive Is mandatory.



9) Kindly provide the inspection for Files pertains to waiving rules of DoPT / UPSC
in the recruitment cases of Ex. CAO, Legal Assistant in the CWPRS, Pune.



10) Kindly provide the inspection for CWPRS land encroachment cases files, legal
opinion files, legal assistant involvement files in such cases.



11) Kindly provide the inspection for CWPRS land 99 years lease cases files, legal
opinion files, legal assistant involvement files in such cases.



                                         2


 12) Kindly provide the Inspection for CWPRS security staff disputes files pertaining
to Maharashtra Security Services cases files, legal opinion files and legal assistant
involvement files in such cases.



13) Kindly provide the inspection for Circular file No. 636/10/2021-Adm/183 and,
kindly provide the CWPRS authority information to change/modify the DoPT O.M.
dated-23rd December 2013 and other O.M. after legal opinion of legal assistant
and circulated the circular in CWPRS, Pune.



14) Kindly provide the Information regarding Central Administrative Tribunal
pending cases list and updated legal expenditures for CAT cases in CWPRS, Pune.

Also, kindly provide the registered number of all pending CAT cases."



The CPIO furnished a pointwise reply to the appellant on 07.06.2022 stating as
under:



"Point No 1 to 7:

The applicant is working in the same office where the Admin section of CWPRS is
located, therefore, he can inspect all files or correspondence related to RTI Query
(1) to (7) at a mutually convenient date during the CWPRS (Central Water and
Power Research Station, Pune, PIN 411024) office working hours.



Point No 8:

The Query is not clear. The applicant is using intemperate language and hurling
unfounded allegations under the cover of the RTI application. The applicant should
desist from using such language in the RTI application.



Point No 9:

The applicant is working in the same office where the Admin section of CWPRS is
located, therefore, he can inspect all files or correspondence related to this RTI
Query (9) at a mutually convenient date during the CWPRS (Central Water and
Power Research Station, Pune, PIN 411024) office working hours.



Point No 10:

The applicant is working in the same office where 
the CPC
 (Construction and
Procurement Cell) of CWPRS is located, therefore, he can inspect all files or
correspondence related to this RTI Query (10) at a mutually convenient date
during CWPRS office working hours.



                                          3


 Point No 11 & 12:

According to 
section 2(n)
 of the RTI act 2005 access to shared
correspondence/letters constitute third-party information that cannot be provided
to the applicant. The information being sought is third-party personal information,
the disclosure of which would not serve any public interest.The information is thus
exempted drom disclosure under 
Section 8 (1) (j)
 of the RTI, 2005.



Point No 13:

The applicant is working in the same office where the Admin section of CWPRS is
located, therefore, he can inspect all files or correspondence related to this RTI
Query 13 at a mutually convenient date during the CWPRS (Central Water and
Power Research Station, Pune, PIN 411024) office working hours

Point No. 14:

According to 
section 2(n)
 of the RTI act 2005 access to shared
correspondence/letters constitute third-party information that cannot be provided
to the applicant. The information being sought is third-party personal information,
the disclosure of which would not serve any public interest.The information is thus
exempted drom disclosure under 
Section 8 (1) (j)
 of the RTI, 2005."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 24.06.2022. FAA's order
dated 26.07.2022, upheld the reply of the CPIO and further held as under:



"I have gone through the CPIO reply. CPIO has correctly replied. Since the
applicant is working in the same office where the administrative section of CWPRS
is located. he can look the relevant files on mutually convenient date during the
CWPRS office working hours."



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, appellant approached the Commission with the
instant Second Appeal on the ground of incomplete and misleading information
received from the CPIO.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Not present.

Respondent: Y N Srivastava, Addl. Director & FAA along with A A Purohit, Scientist
E & CPIO present through video-conference.



                                         4


 The CPIO submitted that a point wise reply along with relevant inputs has already
been provided to the Appellant. In addition to it, an opportunity of inspection of
relevant records was also offered to the Appellant by the FAA. Also, upon receipt
of hearing notice another offer of inspection of records was provided to the
Appellant. However, despite being an employee of Respondent organization he
did not avail of the said opportunity.



Decision:



The Commission upon a perusal of records and after scrutinizing the contents of
instant RTI Application observes that the information sought by the Appellant is
indeterminate and also appears to be voluminous in nature, collation and
compilation of which would entail diversion of manpower resources of the Public
Authority and thus, cannot be provided in view of 
Section 7(9)
 of RTI Act. The
same can be garnered from the relevant provisions of 
Section 7(9)
 of RTI Act
which is reproduced below for ready reference -



      "...7. Disposal of request.--

                                          xxx
      (9) An information shall ordinarily be provided in the form in which it is
      sought unless it would disproportionately divert the resources of the public
      authority or would be detrimental to the safety or preservation of the
      record in question..."



It also appears that the Appellant has grossly misconceived the idea of exercising
his Right to Information as being absolute and unconditional. It is rather
unfortunate that even the best of intentions have to not only stand the test of
procedural requirements and fetters laid down in the 
RTI Act
 but also stand the
test of practicality, a notion well recognised by superior Courts through various
judgments such as the Hon'ble Supreme Court's observation in 
Central Board of
Secondary Education (CBSE) & Anr. v. Aditya Bandhopadhyay and others
 [(2011)
8 SCC 497] stating that:




   "37. xxxxx
   
The Act
 should not be allowed to be misused or abused, to become a tool to
   obstruct the national development and integration, or to destroy the peace,
   tranquility and harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be converted into
   a tool of oppression or intimidation of honest officials striving to do their
   duty. The nation does not want a scenario where 75% of the staff of

                                        5

     public authorities spends 75% of their time in collecting and furnishing
    information to applicants instead of discharging their regular duties. The
    threat of penalties under the 
RTI Act
 and the pressure of the authorities
    under the 
RTI Act
 should not lead to employees of a public authorities
    prioritising 'information furnishing', at the cost of their normal and regular
    duties."(Emphasis Supplied)......."



For better understanding of the mandate of the 
RTI Act
, the Appellant shall note
that outstretching the interpretation of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act to include
deductions and inferences to be drawn by the CPIO is unwarranted as it casts
immense pressure on the CPIOs to ensure that they provide the correct
deduction/inference to avoid being subject to penal provisions under the 
RTI Act
.
For the sake of clarity, the provision of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act is reproduced
hereunder:

      "2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--

       (f) "information" means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;.."

In this regard, the Appellant's attention is drawn towards a judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court on the scope and ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act in the
matter of CBSE vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors.[CIVIL APPEAL NO.6454 of
2011]wherein it was held as under:

 
"35. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some misconceptions about
the 
RTI Act
. 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and
existing.........A public authority is also not required to furnish information which
require drawing of inferences and/or making of assumptions. It is also not
required to provide `advice' or `opinion' to an applicant, nor required to obtain
and furnish any `opinion' or `advice' to an applicant. The reference to `opinion'
or `advice' in the definition of `information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers
to such material available in the records of the public authority. Many public
authorities have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and
opinion to the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused
with any obligation under the 
RTI Act
." (Emphasis Supplied)



                                          6

 Similarly, in the matter of 
Khanapuram Gandaiah vs Administrative Officer &Ors.
[SLP (CIVIL) NO.34868 OF
 2009], the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:




      "7....Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material which is
not before him; or any information he could have obtained under law.
Under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such information
which can be accessed by the "public authority" under any other law for the time
being in force. The answers sought by the petitioner in the application could not
have been with the public authority nor could he have had access to this
information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged to give any reasons as to
why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was before him...."

(Emphasis Supplied)

And, in the matter of 
Dr. Celsa Pinto, Ex-Officio Joint Secretary,(School
Education) vs. The Goa State Information Commission
 [2008 (110) Bom L R
1238], the Hon'ble Bombay High Court held as under:




      "..... In the first place, the Commission ought to have noticed that the Act
confers on the citizen the right to information. Information has been defined
by 
Section 2(f)
 as follows.



 
Section 2(f)
 -Information means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;

      The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the question why
which would be the same thing as asking the reason for a justification for a
particular thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot expect to
communicate to the citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not done
in the sense of a justification because the citizen makes a requisition about
information. Justifications are matter within the domain of adjudicating
authorities and cannot properly be classified as information." (Emphasis
Supplied

In addition to above, it is also not out of place to note that information sought for
at points no. 1,9,10 & 11 contains the elements of personal information of third
party officer which cannot be divulged in view of 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act. It can



                                          7

 be garnered from a bare perusal of the text of 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act as
under:



   "8. Exemption from disclosure of information.--



      (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there shall be no
          obligation to give any citizen,
                                               xxxx

          (j) information which relates to personal information the disclosure of
      which has no relationship to any public activity or interest, or which would
      cause unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual unless the
      Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer or
      the appellate authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that the larger
      public interest justifies the disclosure of such information;.."



In this regard, attention of the parties is also drawn towards a judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of Central Public Information
Officer, Supreme Court of 
India Vs. Subhash Chandra Agarwal
 in Civil Appeal No.
10044 of 2010 with Civil Appeal No. 10045 of 2010 and Civil Appeal No. 2683 of
2010 wherein the import of "personal information" envisaged under 
Section
8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act has been exemplified in the context of earlier ratios 
laid down by

the same Court in the matter(
s) of Canara Bank Vs. C.S. Shyam
 in Civil Appeal
No.22 of 2009; 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande vs. Central Information
Commissioner & Ors.
, (2013) 1 SCC 212 and R.K. Jain vs. Union of India & Anr.,
(2013) 14 SCC 794.The following was thus held:




       "59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion, would
       indicate that personal records, including name, address, physical, mental
       and psychological status, marks obtained, grades and answer sheets,
       are all treated as personal information. Similarly, professional records,
       including qualification, performance, evaluation reports, ACRs,
       disciplinary proceedings, etc. are all personal information. Medical
       records, treatment, choice of medicine, list of hospitals and doctors
       visited, findings recorded, including that of the family members,
       information relating to assets, liabilities, income tax returns, details of
       investments, lending and borrowing, etc. are personal information. Such
       personal information is entitled to protection from unwarranted invasion
       of privacy and conditional access is available when stipulation of larger
       public interest is satisfied. This list is indicative and not exhaustive..."

                                          8


 However, ignoring the aforesaid aspect, the CPIO has erred in giving the
opportunity of relevant records of the concerned third parties to the Appellant
without seeking their consent/objection under 
Section 11
 of RTI Act. In this
regard, the CPIO is advised to exercise due diligence and follow due process of
law as envisaged under the 
RTI Act
 before divulging any third party's exempted
information.



Nonetheless, as a scope of limited relief, the CPIO is directed to revisit the
contents of points no. 1 and 14 of RTI Application and provide the total number(
in numeric figures) which may suffices the information sought by the Appellant
on the said points.



The above said information should be provided by the CPIO free of cost to the
Appellant within 7 days from the date of receipt of this order under due
intimation to the Commission.



                     The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                 Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                       Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )

Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                       9