[Cites 
16
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Smt. Basavantamma vs Chief Commissioner Of Income Tax (Cca), ... on 24 July, 2020


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                              केन्द्रीय सूचना आयोग
                     Central Information Commission
                          बाबा गंगनाथ मागग, मुननरका
                      Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                      नई निल्ली, New Delhi - 110067

नितीय अपील संख्या / Second Appeal No. CIC/CCITB/A/2018/631956

Smt. Basavantamma                                          ... अपीलकताग/Appellant
                                     VERSUS
                                      बनाम
The CPIO, O/o the Income Tax                                ...प्रनतवािी /Respondent
Officer, Ward No. 1(3),(4), ITO,
North Wing, HMT Bhavan, Old
Bellary Road, Bengaluru.

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:

RTI : 23-05-2018            FA     : 07-07-2018          SA       : 20-09-2018

CPIO : Not on record        FAO : 27-07-2018             Hearing : 10-07-2020

                                    ORDER

1.     The appellant filed an application under the 
Right to Information Act, 2005


(RTI Act
) before the Central Public Information Officer (CPIO), Principal Chief
Commissioner of Income Tax (CCA), Bangalore seeking income tax details of her
estranged husband, Mr. G H Sharanappa.

2.     As the CPIO had not given a reply to the appellant within a period of 30
days, she filed the first appeal dated 07-07-2018 which was disposed of by the first
appellate authority on 27-07-2018. Thereafter, she filed a second appeal u/
Section
19(3)
 of the RTI Act before the Commission requesting to take appropriate legal
action against the CPIO u/
Section 20
 of the RTI Act, 2005 and also to direct him to
provide the sought for information.

Hearing:

3.     The appellant, Smt. Basavantamma was represented in the hearing through
video conferencing. Mr. Paulia C N, ITO participated in the hearing representing
the respondent through video conferencing. The written submissions are taken on
record.

                                                                           Page 1 of 6


 4.     It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the details of the income tax
returns of her estranged husband, Mr. G H Sharanappa as on the date of RTI
application should be disclosed to her. Further, it was requested to provide at least
the gross income of Mr. G H Sharanappa to defend her maintenance case.

5.     The respondent contended that the appellant had not mentioned any specific
time period for which the information is being sought. However, the income tax
returns are available online for a period of six years. Further, he submitted that the
Income Tax Returns of some other individual is an exempted information
u/
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 and therefore, they have denied this
information to the appellant.

Decision:

6.     With regards to the applicability of 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005
regarding non-disclosure of the Income Tax Returns, this Commission refers to the
judgment dated 03-10-2012 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in SLP(C)
No. 27734 of 2012 titled as 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande v. Central
Information Commission
 & ors., wherein, it has been held as under:-


          "12. The petitioner herein sought for copies of all memos, show
          cause notices and censure/punishment awarded to the third
          respondent from his employer and also details viz. movable and
          immovable properties and also the details of his investments,
          lending and borrowing from Banks and other financial institutions.
          Further, he has also sought for the details of gifts stated to have
          accepted by the third respondent, his family members and friends
          and relatives at the marriage of his son. The information mostly
          sought for finds a place in the income tax returns of the third
          respondent. The question that has come up for consideration is
          whether the abovementioned information sought for qualifies to be
          "personal information" as defined in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of
          the RTI Act.

          13. We are in agreement with the CIC and the courts below that
          the details called for by the petitioner i.e. copies of all memos
          issued to the third respondent, show cause notices and orders of
          censure/punishment etc. are qualified to be personal information
          as defined in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act. The
          performance of an employee/officer in an organization is primarily
          a matter between the employee and the employer and normally
          those aspects are governed by the service rules which fall under
          the expression "personal information", the disclosure of which has
          no relationship to any public activity or public interest. On the

                                                                            Page 2 of 6

           other hand, the disclosure of which would cause unwarranted
          invasion of privacy of that individual. Of course, in a given case, if
          the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public
          Information Officer of the Appellate Authority is satisfied that the
          larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such information,
          appropriate orders could be passed but the petitioner cannot claim
          those details as a matter of right.

          14. The details disclosed by a person in his income tax returns are
          "personal information" which stand exempted from disclosure
          under clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, unless involves a
          larger public interest and the Central Public Information Officer or
          the State Public Information Officer or the Appellate Authority is
          satisfied that the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of
          such information."

7.     Henceforth, the legal issue to be decided herein is whether the appellant
claiming to be the legally wedded wife of Mr. G H Sharanappa is entitled to seek
details of his income tax returns. 
In this regard, it is apt to mention the decision
dated 01-07-2009 of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in W.P.(C) 803/2009 titled
as 
Vijay Prakash v. UOI & others
 wherein it has been clarified that in a private
dispute between husband and wife, the basic protection afforded by virtue of the
exemption from disclosure enacted under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 cannot be lifted or
disturbed unless the petitioner is able to justify how such disclosure would be in
'public interest'. In the matter at hand, the appellant has not succeeded in
establishing that the information sought is for larger public purpose.


8.     Since filing of the Income Tax Returns by an individual with the Income
Tax Department is not a public activity and rather it is in the nature of
an obligation which a citizen owes to the State viz. to pay his taxes, this
information cannot be disclosed to the appellant in the absence of any larger public
interest relying on the legal principle enunciated in the judgment dated 11-06-2015
rendered by the Hon'ble Bombay High Court in Writ Petition No. 8753 of 2013
titled as 
Shailesh Gandhi v. The Central Information Commission
, wherein, it
has been observed as follows:-


          "16...The Petitioner possibly being aware of the said position has
          therefore sought to contend that filing of the Income Tax Returns
          is a public activity. I am afraid the said contention is thoroughly
          misconceived as filing of Income Tax Returns can be no stretch of
          imagination be said to be a public activity, but is an obligation
          which a citizen owes to the State viz. to pay his taxes and since the
          said information is held by the Income Tax Department in a

                                                                           Page 3 of 6

          fiduciary capacity, the same cannot be directed to be revealed
         unless the pre-requisites for the same are satisfied."

9.     The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the decision of 
Naresh Kumar Trehan
v. Rakesh Kumar Gupta
 in W.P.(C) 85/2010 & CM Nos.156/2010 & 5560/2011
dated 24-11-2014 has observed as under:-


     "25. Indisputably, 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act would be applicable to
     the information pertaining to Dr Naresh Trehan (petitioner in
     W.P.(C) 88/2010) and the information contained in the income tax
     returns would be personal information under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the
     Act. However, the CIC directed disclosure of information of Dr
     Trehan also by concluding that income tax returns and information
     provided for assessment was in relation to a "public activity." In my
     view, this is wholly erroneous and unmerited. The act of filing
     returns with the department cannot be construed as public activity.
     The expression "public activity" would mean activities of a public
     nature and not necessarily act done in compliance of a statute. The
     expression "public activity" would denote activity done for the public
     and/or in some manner available for participation by public or some
     section of public. There is no public activity involved in filing a
     return or an individual pursuing his assessment with the income tax
     authorities. In this view, the information relating to individual
     assessee could not be disclosed. Unless, the CIC held that the same
     was justified "in the larger public interest."

10. The division bench of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the decision
of 
Harish Kumar v. Provost Marshall
 cum Appellate Authority & Anr, LPA
No. 253/2012 dated 30-03-2012 while denying information in a matrimonial
dispute has held as under:-


 
"11. A Division Bench of this Court in 
Paardarshita Public Welfare
     Foundation Vs. UOI
 AIR 2011 Del.
 
82, in the context of 
Section
     8(1)(j) (supra)
 and relying upon 
Gobind Vs. State of Madhya
     Pradesh
 (1975) 2 SCC 148, Rajagopal Vs. State of Tamil Nadu
     (
1994) 6 SCC 632 and Collector Vs. Canara Bank
 (2005) 1 SCC 496
     has held right to privacy to be a sacrosanct facet of 
Article 21
 of the
     Constitution of India. It was further held that when any personal
     information sought has no nexus with any public activity or interest,
     the same is not to be provided. Finding the information sought 
in that
     case
 to be even remotely having no relationship with any public
     activity or interest and rather being a direct invasion in private life of
     another, information was denied.
 
The full bench of this Court also in
     Secretary General, Supreme Court of 
India Vs. Subhash Chandra
     Agarwal
 AIR 2010 Del. 159 has held that the conflict between the

                                                                      Page 4 of 6

       right to personal privacy and public interest in the disclosure of
      personal information is recognized by the legislature by
      incorporating 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act. It was further observed that
      personal information including tax returns, medical records etc.
      cannot be disclosed unless the bar against disclosure is lifted by
      establishing sufficient public interest in disclosure and disclosure
      even then can be made only after duly notifying the third party and
      after considering his views."


11. At this juncture, this Commission deems it appropriate to quote 
Section 2(n)

of the RTI Act, 2005 which reads as under:-

    "2(n):- "third party" means a person other than the citizen making a
    request for information and includes a public authority."

12. From the words circumscribed u/
Section 2(n)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, it is
vividly clear that any person other than the citizen making a request for
information can be termed as 'third party'. Therefore, Mr. G H Sharanappa being a
person other than the RTI applicant surely comes within the definition of 'third
party'. Moreover, the CPIO has also not intended to disclose the information
treating it as confidential and has rather pleaded that there is no public interest in
the matter. This Commission also does not find any public interest which
outweighs the harm caused in its disclosure.

13. This Commission also refers to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court of India in Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 & Ors. dated 13-11-2019 titled
as CPIO, Supreme Court of 
India v. Subhash Chandra Agarwal
, wherein, it
was observed as follows:-


         "59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion,
         would indicate that personal records, including name, address,
         physical, mental and psychological status, marks obtained, grades
         and answer sheets, are all treated as personal information.
         Similarly, professional records, including qualification,
         performance, evaluation reports, ACRs, disciplinary proceedings,
         etc. are all personal information. Medical records, treatment,
         choice of medicine, list of hospitals and doctors visited, findings
         recorded, including that of the family members, information
         relating to assets, liabilities, income tax returns, details of
         investments, lending and borrowing, etc. are personal information.
         Such personal information is entitled to protection from
         unwarranted invasion of privacy and conditional access is
         available when stipulation of larger public interest is satisfied.
         This list is indicative and not exhaustive."



                                                                            Page 5 of 6


 14. In light of the aforesaid decisions and the legal principles enunciated therein,
this Commission after considering the factual matrix of the case is of the opinion
that in the absence of any larger public interest in the matter, the appellant is not
entitled to seek the details of the Income Tax Returns filed by the third party, Mr.
G H Sharanappa which is exempted u/
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.

15. It is to be noted that the appellant has requested this Commission for
disclosure of at least the 'gross income' of Mr. G H Sharanappa so that she could
defend her matrimonial case. Therefore, considering the aspect of marital discord
between the husband and wife vis-à-vis her right of maintenance, this Commission
is of the opinion that the respondent should consider providing only the limited
information of the last six years i.e. the numerical figure(s) of the 'gross income'
of her husband, Mr. G H Sharanappa, within a period of 15 working days from the
date of receipt of this order.

16. With the above observations, the appeal is disposed of.

17. Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.



                                        Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरज कुमार गु प्ता)
                                      Information Commissioner (सूचना आयुक्त)

                                                         निनां क / Date:- 10-07-2020
Authenticated true copy
(अनिप्रमानित सत्यानपत प्रनत)
S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमाग),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),(011-26105682)


Addresses of the parties:

1.    The CPIO & DGM,
      O/o the Income Tax Officer,
      Ward No. 1(3),(4), ITO & Nodal CPIO,
      RTI Cell, 6th Floor, North Wing, HMT Bhavan,
      Old Bellary Road, Bengaluru-560032.



2.    Smt. Basavantamma,





                                                                           Page 6 of 6