[Cites 
19
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Ashish Thakarshibhai Diyora vs Bar Council Of India on 10 May, 2022


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/BCOIN/A/2021/120558

Ashish Thakarshibhai Diyora                                ......अपीलकता /Appellant
                                         VERSUS
                                          बनाम

CPIO,
Bar Council of Gujarat, RTI
Cell, 3rd Floor, Satyamev Complex,
Opp. High Court of Gujarat, Sola,
Ahmedabad - 380060, Gujarat.                             .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                      :   06/05/2022
Date of Decision                     :   06/05/2022

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :               Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on             :   07/03/2020
CPIO replied on                      :   11/06/2020
First appeal filed on                :   01/07/2020
First Appellate Authority's order    :   08/03/2021
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated           :   15/04/2021

Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 07.03.2020 seeking the following
information:



(1) "Forms were submitted in your department in the year 2017, 2018, 2019 to get
Sanad. Out of them, marksheets of graduation from other states' universities were
verified and received contradictory, suspicious verification clarifications of some
persons from there. Verification of other universities is received from totally

                                           1

 doubtful sources and received false information and received verification relating
to false courses, years and places. Therefore it is requested to provide information
of all Sanad forms of such persons, marksheets of every years of graduations,
LL.B., copy of migration certificate, provisional certificate and letters addressed to
your office for verification and correspondences done in reference thereto, as well
as provide information about reply and clarification received and necessary
information of remarks/notes of your office in that reference. Further more, also
provide information about persons to whom your office has issued sanad. I/we are
ready to pay expense for getting all these information.
(2) The applicants who are pending to get sanad, have completed three years of
graduation of after Std.12 from their local university, but for law-admission,
mandatory 45% is not achieved, so such applicant who has completed only last
third year from other state's university, bringing brought certificate-marksheet
from there and has submitted with form in the law college. Thus in form to get
sanad, such candidate has concealed fact of graduation passed with less
percentage from their local university. So only last year's other university's
marksheet of graduation is submitted for such candidate. Therefore please
provide every details of such applicants alongwith necessary evidences with sanad
form."



The CPIO replied to the appellant on 11.06.2020 stating as follows:-



       "The information asked for cannot be supplied due to following reasons.

   (i)    As per section 9(1)(i) of the Bar Council of Gujarat Right to information
          Rules, 2014."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 01.07.2020. FAA's order
dated 08.03.2021 upheld the reply of CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, appellant approached the Commission with the
instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present through video conference.

Respondent: Nilesh J Panchal, Incharge Secretary & CPIO present through video
conference.



                                          2


 The Appellant reiterated the information sought for in the RTI Application and
agitated against the denial of the same by the CPIO citing RTI rules of Bar Council
of Gujarat.



Upon apprising the Appellant regarding the applicability of the exemption of

Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, he contested that he has not named any third party
in the RTI Application and urged the underlying issue concerns his sanad also.



The CPIO submitted that he has taken charge only in first week of March and has
been able to gather from the available records that the information was denied as
the High Court of Gujarat has stayed the case proceedings untill the next date of
hearing i.e 08.06.2022.



Decision:



The Commission based on a perusal of the facts on record observes that facts and
circumstances of the instant case is squarely covered by the below quoted
findings and decision of this bench in the matter of Divya Pranav vide File No.
CIC/BCOIN/A/2020/129309 dated 03.02.2022, wherein the same subject matter
of sanad was pursued and denial was on the grounds of the Bar Council of Gujarat
RTI Rules, 2014:



Hearing proceedings in Divya Pranav Case:



       "The CPIO relied upon his written submissions sent prior to the hearing
justifying the denial of the information based on 
Section 9(1)(i)
 of the Bar Council
of Gujarat Right to Information Rules, 2014 by stating that 
Section 28
 of the RTI
Act allows rule-making power to the competent authority for implementation of
the 
RTI Act
. He further harped on the argument that the Appellant filed forged
documents for seeking registration with the BCG against which BCG has filed a
criminal complaint against her and since the matter is sub judice, the information
sought regarding the action taken on her representation cannot be provided.



   The Appellant through her written submission brought the attention of the
bench to an earlier decision of the Commission vide File
No.CIC/BCOIN/A/2019/144991 dated 23.08.2021 (Shailesh Dilipbhai Babria vs. Bar
Council Gujarat) against the same CPIO wherein the same question of law was
determined and adjudicated upon. The relevant extract of the said decision is
reproduced hereunder for clarity:



                                         3


     'Having heard both the parties and on perusal of the available records, the
Commission at the outset notes that in the instant matter information has been
denied by the Respondent by quoting various subclauses of Rule 9 of the Bar
Council of Gujarat Right to Information Rules (BCGRTI Rules), 2014 which the
Respondent claims to have the approval of the Bar Council of India. At the
outset, the Commission in the following paragraphs provides its views on Rule 9
of the BCGRTI Rules, 2014. the relevant provisions of Rule 9 read as under:



   9. Restrictions:-



   (1) No information shall be provided to any applicant in the following
       matters:-



    (i) In respect of the document of records produced in a judicial proceeding.

    (ii) The information, which is likely to affect the security of any institution or
the public order.

    (iii) The information, which has no relationship with the public activity.

    (iv) The information, which could cause unwarranted invasion to the privacy
of any person.

    (v) If it relates to a policy matter under consideration.

    (vi) If a copy can be issued under the provisions of Advocates Acts, 1961 and
the Rules framed by the Council.



    While it is true that 
Section 28
 of the RTI Act, 2005 allows the competent
authority to make rules by notification in the official gazette in order to
implement the provisions of the Act, the provisions of the principal act cannot be
invoked in order to impose new kinds of exemption from disclosure of
information apart from the ones enumerated
 u/s 8
 and 
9
 of the RTI Act, 2005. It
is a matter of concern that some of the provisions enumerated in Rule 9 are
exemptions beyond what is clearly prescribed in the exhaustive provisions of

Section 8
 of the RTI Act, 2005 which has been carefully deliberated, debated and
enacted by the Parliament. The Commission also observes that the provisions are
ambiguously drafted and aim to allow denial of such information which may
otherwise be allowed for disclosure as per the 
RTI Act, 2005
. For instance Rule 9

(iii) allows for denial of information which has no relation to any public activity.
However, the RTI Act, 2005 does not allow for denial of information merely on
the ground that it is not related to any public activity or interest. The test of
public activity or interest can only be applied to justify disclosure of information
otherwise exempted
 u/s 8 (1) (d)
, (e) or (j) of the 
RTI Act, 2005
. The following
observations made in the judgement of the Hon'ble High Court of Kerala in
Treesha Irish v. The CPIO and Ors. WP (C) No.6532 of 2006 dated 30.08.2010 is
relevant in this respect:

                                          4


     '23. There is no provision anywhere in the Act to the effect that information
can be refused to be disclosed if no public interest is involved. Of course in a case
of personal information, if it has no relationship with any public activity or
interest, the information officer has discretion to refuse to disclose the same, if
the larger public interest does not justify disclosure of such information. But on
the ground of lack of public interest involved alone, the public information
officer cannot refuse to disclose the information, without a finding first that the
information is personal information having no relationship to any public activity
or interest.'

   Similarly, some of the provisions such as Rule 9 (iv) are redundant since

Section 8(1)(j)
 already allows for denial of such information which would cause
unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual.



   On closer examination of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 it is evident that there is no
enabling provision in the principal Act i.e., 
RTI Act, 2005
 for Bar Council of
Gujarat to enact rules for denying information in addition to what is prescribed
under the 
RTI Act, 2005
. Similarly, 
Section 28(2)
 which empowers the public
authority to notify Rules for implementing the principal Act also makes no
reference to denial of further information by way of additional rules. Clearly,
Parliament's intention was to list out exemptions for disclosure of information
only
 u/s 8
 and 
9
 of the RTI Act, 2005.



 
Furthermore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
State of UP &Ors vs Renusagar
Power Co and Ors
 1988 AIR 1737 decided on 28.07.1988 held as follows:




      'If the exercise of power is in the nature of subordinate legislation, the
exercise must conform to the provisions of the statute. All the conditions of the
statute must be fulfilled.'

      Hence, Rule 9 of the BCGRTI Rules, 2014 clearly appears to be in
contravention of the parent statute. Therefore, in exercise of its powers under

Section 25 (5)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, the Commission recommends to the
Secretary, Bar Council of Gujarat to put up the instant decision before the
competent authority to take a considered view regarding amending the Bar
Council of Gujarat Right to Information Rules, 2014 in view of the above-
mentioned observations.



     The Commission also directs Shri P.M. Parmar, Secretary, Bar Council of
Gujarat to provide a revised response in accordance with the provisions of the


                                         5


RTI Act, 2005
 to the Appellant by 30.09.2021 under intimation to the
Commission.'

Decision in Divya Pranav Case:



       "The Commission based on a perusal of the facts on record, at the outset,
takes exception to the fact that P.M. Parmar, Secretary, Bar Council of Gujarat has
reiterated the same grounds in the instant matter which were put forth by him
before the coordinate bench in the Shailesh Babaria matter despite the fact that
the reliance placed upon 
Section 9
 of Bar Council of Gujarat Right to Information
Rules, 2014 was held to be in contravention to the provisions of the 
RTI Act
. P.M.
Parmar, Secretary, Bar Council of Gujarat is advised to desist from putting forth
the same submissions before the Commission in the future.



 
....The CPIO is reminded that denial of the information under the 
RTI Act

should be in accordance with the exemption clauses of 
Section 8
 and the relevant
clause ought to be categorically invoked for withholding the information. While
putting forth the plea of sub judice, the CPIO has not cited any exemption clause
of the 
RTI Act
 to deny the information. Moreover, in this regard the attention of
the CPIO is drawn towards a judgment of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the
matter of 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. R.K. Jain W.P. (C
) 14120/ 2009 dated
23.09.2010 wherein it was held as under:




 
'5...........The matter being sub judice before a court is not one of the
categories of information which is exempt from disclosure under any of the
clauses of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act.'

       The CPIO has also failed to discharge the onus of justifying the denial of the
information as required under 
Section 19(5)
 of the RTI Act. He has instead
narrated at length the alleged background of the criminal complaint against the
Appellant and other extraneous considerations which has no bearing on the
provision of information under the 
RTI Act
. Here, reference may be had of another
judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the matter of 
Dy. Commissioner of
Police v. D.K. Sharma, WP(C) No.
 12428 of 2009 dated 15.12.2010, wherein it was
held as under:


       '6. This Court is inclined to concur with the view expressed by the CIC that
in order to deny the information under the 
RTI Act
 the authority concerned
would have to show a justification with reference to one of the specific clauses
under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act. In the instant case, the Petitioner has been
unable to discharge that burden. The mere fact that a criminal case is pending


                                         6

 may not by itself be sufficient unless there is a specific power to deny disclosure
of the information concerning such case.'

It is not appropriate for the CPIO to question the intent of the RTI Applicant or the
context for seeking information and 
Section 6(2)
 of the RTI Act ensures against the
same as under:



      6. Request for obtaining information.--



      (2) An applicant making request for information shall not be required to
give any reason for requesting the information or any other personal details
except those that may be necessary for contacting him.



Similarly, in a judgment of the Apex Court in the matter of 
Ferani Hotels Private
Ltd. Vs. The State Information Commissioner, Greater Mumbai & Ors.
 in Civil
Appeal Nos. 9064-9065 of 2018 dated 27.09.2018 it was observed as under:




      '15. The purport of the said Act is apparent from 
Section 6
 of the said Act,
which provides for the manner of making a request for obtaining information. In
terms of sub-section (2) of 
Section 6
 of the said Act, there is no mandate on an
applicant to give any reason for requesting the information, i.e., anybody should
be able to obtain the information as long as it is part of the public record of a
public authority.....



      xxx


      16. The only exemption from disclosure of information, of whatever
nature, with the public authority is as per 
Sections 8
 & 
9
 of the said Act. Thus,
unless the information sought for falls under these provisions, it would be
mandatory for the public authorities to disclose the information to an applicant.'

      xxx"



DECISION



                                         7

 Having observed as above, the Commission rejects the denial of the information
as cited by the CPIO in the instant matter under the Bar Council of Gujarat RTI
Rules, 2014.



However, at the same time, there is no scope of relief to be ordered in the matter
as the information sought for relates to third parties and disclosure of the same
stands exempted under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act. 
In this regard, the attention
of the Appellant is drawn towards a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the matter of Central Public Information Officer, Supreme Court of 
India Vs.
Subhash Chandra Agarwal
 in Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 with Civil Appeal
No. 10045 of 2010 and Civil Appeal No. 2683 of 2010 wherein the import of
"personal information" envisaged under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act has been
exemplified in the context of earlier ratios 
laid down by
 the same Court in the
matter(
s) of Canara Bank Vs. C.S. Shyam
 in Civil Appeal No.22 of 2009; 
Girish
Ramchandra Deshpande vs. Central Information Commissioner & Ors.
, (2013) 1
SCC 212 and R.K. Jain vs. Union of India & Anr., (2013) 14 SCC 794. The following
was thus held:




       "59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion, would
indicate that personal records, including name, address, physical, mental and
psychological status, marks obtained, grades and answer sheets, are all treated as
personal information. Similarly, professional records, including qualification,
performance, evaluation reports, ACRs, disciplinary proceedings, etc. are all
personal information. Medical records, treatment, choice of medicine, list of
hospitals and doctors visited, findings recorded, including that of the family
members, information relating to assets, liabilities, income tax returns, details of
investments, lending and borrowing, etc. are personal information. Such personal
information is entitled to protection from unwarranted invasion of privacy and
conditional access is available when stipulation of larger public interest is
satisfied. This list is indicative and not exhaustive..."



             With the above observations, the appeal is disposed of.



                                                     Saroj Punhani (सरोजपुनहािन)
                                                                           हािन)
                                          Information Commissioner (सूचनाआयु )


                                         8

 Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                 9