[Cites 
26
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Samir Sardana vs Idbi Bank Ltd. on 3 November, 2021


Author: 
Suresh Chandra


Bench: 
Suresh Chandra


                                        के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                                 Central Information Commission
                                    बाबा गंगनाथ माग,मुिनरका
                                  Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                                  नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या / Second Appeal No. CIC/IDBIL/A/2019/652226
Samir Sardana                                       ... अपीलकता/Appellant

                                           VERSUS
                                            बनाम
CPIO: IDBI Bank Ltd.
Cuffe Parade, Mumbai                                          ... ितवादीगण/Respondents

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:

RTI : 30.07.2019                   FA      : 07.09.2019          SA       : 26.09.2019

CPIO : 27.08.2019                  FAO : 19.09.2019              Hearing : 18.08.2021


                                             CORAM:
                                       Hon'ble Commissioner
                                     SHRI SURESH CHANDRA
                                            ORDER

                                           (01.11.2021)


1.           The issues under consideration arising out of the second appeal dated 26.09.2019
include the reliefs sought by the appellant in terms of his prayer as under:

     (i)        Impose Maximum Penalty, on the PIO under 
Section 20(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.

     (ii)       Dismissal of the PIO (under the Ministry of Finance Rules and the Code of
                Conduct for Bank staff and other Officers laid down by the Ministry of Finance)
                for illegal and malafide action and also under the IDBI BANK Service Rules-
                which has several provisions for the same.

     (iii)      Administrative action and/strictures, against the PIO (under 
Section 20(2)
 , of the
                RTI Act,2005, ,and also under the IDBI BANK service rules- which has several
                provisions for the same.

                                                                                         Page 1 of 25


       (iv)       Administrative action and/strictures, against the FAA for making a false, baseless,
                 fraudulent and mala fide order.

      (v)        Recommendation to the Ministry of Finance for administrative action
                 and/strictures, against the PIO and the FAA.

      (vi)       Direct the Respondents to refund the Application fee paid by Complainant while
                 submitting RTI Application, as per section (7) (6) of the 
RTI Act
.

      (vii)      Invoke its powers under the 
RTI Act
 to issue any other direction or
                 recommendation as it may deem appropriate.

      (viii)     Direct the public authority to make entry in Service Book/ provisions Annual
                 Performance Appraisal Report of the Respondents for defying the of the Act

      (ix)       Compensate the Appellant.

1.1           The appellant while challenging the order of the First Appellate Authority had
brought out the following grounds:

       The CPIO had provided partial information and rejected most of the information
              illegally under 
section 7 (9)
 and 
section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act.
       The respondent had fraudulently claimed that data was not available with the
              bank.

       The respondent had rejected the vital information regarding loan disbursal/ NPA
              accounts.

       Sample loan application and loan disbursal note was refused by the bank.
       The respondent had ignored the larger public interest involved in this matter and
              simply rejected the information.

       The respondent had illegally rejected data on Tarun and Kishor loans although
              the Mudra loans were structured to capture the data sought.
1.2           The appellant through his RTI application dated 30.07.2019 and first appeal dated
07.09.2019 sought the following information:-



                                                                                         Page 2 of 25


 (i) NPAs
     • NPA in the 3 categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun) of Mudra loans o/s as
           at March 31, 2019, in terms of number and amount
              o PIO to confirm that the list of NPA Accounts by name and value and
                 geography is available in electronic format
     • W.r.t. the above NPA loans in each of the 3 categories, the ageing in terms
           of the number of years for which the accounts are NPA (as at March 31,
           2019) - by number and value
              o Less than 1 year
              o 1 - 2 years
              o 2-3 years
              o 3-4 years
     • W.r.t. the above NPA loans in each of the 3 categories, the nature for the
           accounts which are NPA (as at March 31, 2019) by number and value
              o Male and Female
              o Minorities and Non-Minorities
              o SC-ST and General
              o OBC and General
     • W.r.t. the above NPA loans (as at March 31, 2019) in each of the above said
           3 categories, the ageing in terms of the number of years, from when the loan
           was "sanctioned" (as opposed to when the loan became an NPA in point 2
           above)
              o FY 2015
              o FY 2016
              o FY 2017
              o FY 2018
              o FY 2019
     • W.r.t. the above NPA loans (as at March 31, 2019) in each of the 3
           categories, the state wise distribution of the NPA is sought for the Top 15
           states by value and number of NPA accounts separately for the Bank

                                                                             Page 3 of 25

          • W.r.t. the above NPA loans (as at March 31, 2019) in each of the 3
            categories, the district wise distribution of the NPA is sought for the Top 15
            districts by value and number of NPA accounts separately for the Bank
         • PIO to confirm that the eligibility condition for the Mudra loans excludes
            previous defaulters, from the bank within a particular time period or for a
            time period
                o In addition, if Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the technology
                     system and platform used to verify and authenticate the same
• PIO to confirm that the eligibility condition for the Mudra loans excludes previous
       borrowers of mudra loans from the bank within a particular time period or for a
       time period
                o In addition, If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the technology
                     system and platform used to verify and authenticate the same
• PIO to confirm that the eligibility condition for the Mudra loans excludes previous
       borrowers of mudra loans from other banks within a particular time period or for
       a time period
                o In, addition, If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the technology
                     system and platform used to verify and authenticate the same
• PIO to confirm that the eligibility condition for the Mudra loans excludes previous
       other borrowers of mudra loans from the bank with the same address as the
       proposed borrower, within a particular time period or for a time period
                o In addition, if yes, the PIO to provide the name of the technology
                     system and platform used to verify and authenticate the same

(ii)     Disbursals
• PIO to provide the aggregate of the loan disbursals (on all India basis) in the 3
       categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun) of Mudra loans for the last 4 financial
       years, in terms of number and amount
• PIO to provide the aggregate of the loan disbursals (for the top 10 states by value
       and number of borrowers) in the 3 categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun) of
       Mudra loans for the last 4 financial years, in terms of number and amount

                                                                                 Page 4 of 25

 • PIO to provide the aggregate of the loan disbursals (for the top 20 districts by
   value and number of borrowers) in the 3 categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun) of
   Mudra loans for the last 3 financial years, in terms of number and amount
• PIO to confirm that the disbursal of Shishu loans are made on outright basis or on
   re-imbursement node or direct payments to suppliers/vendors
            o If on outright basis, PIO to confirm that the borrower has to provide
               proof of expenditure on self attestation basis or on declaration and/or
               certification
            o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the Bank has
               no proof of expenditure
            o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the Bank has
               no self attested/certified proof of expenditure
            o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the Bank has
               no 3rd party attested/certified proof of expenditure
• PIO to confirm that the disbursal of Kishor loans are made on outright basis or
   on re-imbursement node or direct payments to suppliers/vendors
      o If on outright basis, PIO to confirm that the borrower has to provide proof
         of expenditure on self attestation basis or on declaration and/or
         certification
      o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the bank has no
         proof of expenditure
      o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the bank has no self
         attested/certified proof of expenditure
      o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the bank has no 3rd
         party attested/certified proof of expenditure
• PIO to confirm that the disbursal of Tarun loans are made on outright basis or on
   re-imbursement node or direct payments to suppliers/vendors
      o If on outright basis, PIO to confirm that the borrower has to provide proof
         of expenditure on self attestation basis or on declaration and/or
         certification

                                                                            Page 5 of 25

            o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the bank has no
              proof of expenditure
           o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the bank has no self
              attested/certified proof of expenditure
           o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the bank has no 3rd
              party attested/certified proof of expenditure

(iii)        Tarun and Kishor Loans
 • W.r.t the Tarun and Kishor loans, separately, the PIO to provide the details of the
        number and value of loans o/s as at March 31, 2019, provided to 1st time
        entrepreneurs for each sector (as the sector of application of loan would be stated
        in the application form and the Project Report)
 • W.r.t the Tarun and Kishor loans, separately, the PIO to provide the details of the
        number and value of loans o/s as at March 31, 2019, provided to Existing
        Businesses of entrepreneurs for each sector (as the sector of application of loan
        would be stated in the application form and the Project Report)
 • W.r.t. the NPA accounts related to Tarun and Kishor loans, separately, the PIO to
        provide the details of the number and value of loans o/s as at March 31, 2019,
        provided to 1st time entrepreneurs
 • W.r.t. the NPA accounts related to Tarun and Kishor loans, separately, the PIO to
        provide the details of the number and value of loans o/s as at March 31, 2019,
        provided to the existing business of entrepreneurs
 • W.r.t. the Loan accounts related to Tarun and Kishor loans for 1st time
        entrepreneurs, separately, the PIO to provide the details of the number and value
        of loans O/s ,as at March 31, 2019, provided for the following purposes, as
        sanctioned and/or disbursed
           o Working Capital
           o Asset Creation
           o Operating Expense
           o Refinancing Interest
           o Marketing Expense

                                                                                 Page 6 of 25

           o Maintenance costs
          o Offset Losses and Write Offs
• W.r.t the Loan accounts related to Tarun and Kishor loans for existing businesses
       of entrepreneurs, separately, the PIO to provide the details of the number and
       value of loans o/s as at March 31, 2019, provided for the following purposes, as
       sanctioned and/or disbursed
          o Working Capital
          o Asset Creation
          o Operating Expense
          o Refinancing Interest
          o Marketing Expense
          o Maintenance costs
          o Offset Losses and Write Offs

(iv)         Proof of expenditure
• PIO to confirm w.r.t the aggregate NPA loans o/s (by value) in each of the 3 loan
       categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun), as at March 31,2019, the following
       information
          o Value of disbursals for which there is no proof of expenditure at all
          o Value of disbursals for which there is proof of expenditure in terms of self
             certification only
          o Value of disbursals for which there is proof of expenditure in terms of 3rd
             party certification only
          o Value of disbursals for which there is proof of expenditure in terms of bills
             and invoices only

(v) Willful defaulters and suits filed or recovery initiated cases
• PIO to provide w.r.t the aggregate MUDRA loans o/s (by value and number) in
       the 3 loan categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun),as at March 31, 2019, declared
       by the bank as willful defaulters





                                                                               Page 7 of 25

 • PIO to provide w.r.t the aggregate MUDRA loans o/s (by value and number) in
       the 3 loan categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun), as at March 31, 2019, w.r.t
       which the bank has initiated recovery proceedings of any sort

(vi)        Technology/ERP Platforms
         • W.r.t the MUDRA loan disbursals made by the Bank, the PIO is to confirm
            the following :

                o That Each loan account is entered into the Bank's Databases and
                   ERP with the name of borrower, address, type of loan and loan
                   account number
                o PIO to provide a sample copy of the Data entry format used to make
                   the loan disbursal entry into the Bank ERP and Bank IT Databases
                   for each of the 3 Mudra loan types
         • W.r.t. the 3 types of Mudra Loans disbursed by the bank, the PIO is to
            provide the following data
                   o A screen shot of 3 sample loan accounts of the 3 types of loan
                      accounts as displayed in the loans or borrower module /section of
                      the Banks ERP/IT databases/systems
                   o If the bank so desires - it can blank out the names of the borrower
                      and the address of the borrower as also the photos of the
                      borrowers

(vii)       Banks and 3rd party services
         • PIO to confirm that it provides assistance to MUDRA borrowers to fill in
            the application and prepare a Tentative or Detailed Project Report
                o If Yes, the PIO to provide 3 sample application forms and 3 Tentative
                   Project Reports which the bank assisted the MUDRA borrowers to
                   prepare in the 3 types of MUDRA loans
         • PIO to confirm the number and value of MUDRA loans disbursed (in the
            last 4 years in the aggregate) for cases wherein the MUDRA borrowers
            used NGOs and other agencies to prepare the application form and the



                                                                              Page 8 of 25

            Tentative or Detailed Project Report, as also, to complete other formalities
           with the bank, for the sanction and disbursal of the MUDRA loan
                 o PIO to provide 3 sample application forms and 3 Tentative Project
                    Reports which the said NGOs and other agencies, assisted the
                    MUDRA borrowers to prepare, in the 3 types of MUDRA loans

(viii)     Repeat borrowers
         • PIO to confirm w.r.t the aggregate loans o/s (by value) in the 3 loan
           categories(Shishu, Kishor and Tarun),as at March 31, 2019, the following
           information
                 o Number and value of loans to repeat borrowers who made no loan
                    defaults
                 o Number and value of loans to repeat borrowers who made some loan
                    defaults

(ix)       Procedures
         • PIO to provide the loan application form and Project Report format and
           disbursal guidelines w.r.t the Shishu, Tarun and Kishor loans - and direct
           the applicant if the said information is available on an authentic mode, on a
           GOI portal on the web

(x) Statistics
         • PIO to confirm that it has information w.r.t the aggregate number of
           MUDRA enterprise units in operation in various districts of India, as at
           March 31, 2019, even on a deductive basis (id.est., assuming that the Non-


           NPAs are operational enterprise units)

(xi)       Audits and inspections
         • PIO to confirm that the Bank has carried out or funded the audit of the
           sanctions and disbursals of MUDRA loans by the Bank , at any time in the
           last 5 years
                 o If Yes, the nature, year, scope of audit and name of audit agency
                 o If Yes, the PIO to confirm that it has a copy of the said audit reports
                    and that they are in eformat

                                                                                Page 9 of 25

                     o If Not, the bank to provide the name of the Public Authority which has
                       the information w.r.t the said audit, if any, carried out
              • PIO to confirm that the CAG has carried out the audit of the sanctions and
                 disbursals of MUDRA loans by the Bank, at any time in the last 5 years
                    o If Yes, the nature, year, scope of audit and name of audit agency
                    o If Yes, the PIO to confirm that the Bank has a copy of the said audit
                       reports and that they are in e-format
              • PIO to confirm that the Bank or the disbursing bankers have used any
                 agency or statistician to ascertain the end use of the Mudra loans in any
                 geography in the last 5 years
                    o If Yes, the nature, year, scope of assignment and name of agency
                    o If Yes, the PIO to confirm that it has a copy of the said analytical or
                       statistical reports and that they are in e-format
                    o If Not, the Bank to provide the name of the Public Authority which
                       has the information w.r.t the said analysis, if any, carried out

     (xii)       Credit insurance
              • PIO to confirm the aggregate credit insurance cover taken by the Bank w.r.t
                 the o/s MUDRA loans as at March 31, 2019

     (xiii)      Case studies and sample credit cases
              • PIO to confirm that the Bank has made case studies on varied enterprise
                 business models for each district or other geography of India, along with tie
                 ups with suppliers, vendors, training companies and video and audio kits for
                 the same
                    o If Yes, PIO to confirm that all the said data is in e-format
                    o If Yes, PIO to confirm that all the said data is available on the web on
                       an authenticated source of the GOI.



2.      Succinctly facts of the case are that the appellant filed an application dated
30.07.2019 under the 
Right to Information Act, 2005
 
(RTI Act
) before the Central Public
Information Officer (CPIO), IDBI Bank Ltd., Cuffe Parade, Mumbai, seeking aforesaid
information. The CPIO vide letter dated 27.08.2019 replied to the appellant. Dissatisfied

                                                                                     Page 10 of 25

 with the same, the appellant filed first appeal dated 07.09.2019. The First Appellate
Authority vide order dated 19.09.2019 disposed of the first appeal. Aggrieved by that,
the appellant filed a second appeal dated 26.09.2019 before this Commission which is
under consideration.



3.             The appellant has filed the instant appeal dated 26.09.2019 inter alia on the
grounds that reply given by the CPIO was not satisfactory. The appellant requested the
Commission to impose Maximum Penalty on the PIO under 
Section 20(1)
 of the RTI
Act, dismiss the PIO for illegal and mala fide action and also under the IDBI Bank
Service Rule, take administrative action and/strictures, against the PIO/FAA under

Section 20 (2)
 of the RTI Act; recommendation to the Ministry of Finance for
administrative action and/strictures against the PIO and the FAA; direct the respondents
to refund the application fee paid by Complainant while submitting RTI Application as
per section (7)(6) of the 
RTI Act
.



4.        The CPIO replied vide letter dated 27.08.2019 and the same is reproduced as
under:-



NPA under 3 categories as on 31 March, 2019:



     Sr. No.               Category              Number of Accounts Gross NPA Amount
                                                                    (Rs. Crore)

     1.                    Shishu                12767                 5.64

     2.                    Kishor                9136                  76.48

     3.                    Tarun                 2925                  98.86
                           Total                 24828                 180.98
Disbursement in three categories under PMMY:



      Financial Shishu                Kishor             Tarun            Total
      Year
                No.          Amt      No.      Amt       No.     Amt      No.        Amt(Rs.
                A/cs                  A/cs               A/cs             A/cs        Crore)





                                                                                  Page 11 of 25

      2015-16   131168 288         27741     702       8955      698      167864 1688
     2016-17   192503 478         61940     1462      17237     1321     271680 3261
     2017-18   162960 458         78209     1803      23347     1801     264516 4063
     2018-19   119474 368         84804     1998      30144     2353     234422 4720




Further, information sought would disproportionately divert the resources of the public
authority for compilation/collating the data, hence, it is exempted from disclosure under

Section 7(a)
 of the RTI Act. It is also observed that the question are hypothetical and in
the nature of obtaining clarification/explanation of the bank which cannot be construed
as "information" as contemplated under 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act".



The FAA vide order dated 19.09.2019 upheld the reply of CPIO.



5.     The appellant and on behalf of the respondent Ms. Hemlata Prabhu, Dy. General
Manager & CPIO, IDBI Bank Ltd., Bandra attended the hearing through video
conference.



5.1.   The appellant inter alia submitted that the respondent had provided the aggregate
of loans disbursed and aggregate Mudra NPAs for the 3 categories and rejected rest of
the information under 
section 7 (9)
 and 
section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act. However, they failed
to provide specific point-wise reply. He argued that the respondent had not provided
specific reasons or rationale while refusing the information. The information had been
sought through e-format or can be accessed in a few minutes on a CD and it would not
divert resources. The data relating to NPA was collated and submitted to Ministry of
Finance in various formats and frequencies, therefore, it was not cumbersome as claimed
by the respondent. The appellant further contended that the information was sought in the
interest of transparency, accountability and larger public interest. Therefore, he requested
that his appeal may be allowed in terms of prayer.



5.1.2 The appellant apart from seeking information as per the RTI application had
sought imposition of maximum penalty; dismissal of the PIO; Administrative action and
strictures against the PIO and FAA; recommendation to the Ministry of Finance for

                                                                                Page 12 of 25

 administrative action/strictures against the PIO and the FAA; refund the application fee;
and compensate the appellant. The imposition of penalty and strictures would have
arisen if the information was denied by the respondent with mala fide.



5.2.   The respondent while defending their case inter alia endorsed the CPIO's reply
dated 27.08.2019 and FAA's order dated 19.09.2019. The respondent further submitted
that the collection of the information would divert the resources of the banks and also in
view of the voluminous nature of the information they had sought the exemption that the
information was not readily available with the bank and culling out of the information
would disproportionately divert the resources of the public authority, hence, exempted
under 
section 7 (9)
 of the RTI Act. They further contended that the appellant in most of
his points had either requested for confirmation of certain facts mentioned by him in his
application, or had asked the bank for identification of fraud cases from the NPA cases,
etc. The request in nature of confirmation, identification, or clarification were not
covered under the definition of "information" under 
section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act.
Therefore, no record or material being maintained in the form that could address the
queries in the nature of seeking confirmation or clarification, the same could not be
furnished to the appellant.



6.     The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case, hearing
both parties and perusal of records, noted that the respondent replied to the RTI
application dated 30.07.2019 on 27.08.2019. Before dwelling upon the complaint some
of the relevant cases may be discussed.

6.1.   
In 
Mr. K.S. Vasudevan vs Ministry of Law and Justice [CIC/SS/A/2011/000828
],
the appellant filed RTI application dated 04.09.2010 seeking the following information:


       "1(a) Whether it is mandatory and compulsory to continue the proceedings initiated by
       the Department when the criminal case is pending before any court of law against those
       officers;

       1(b) Whether the judgments cited are binding on the Department or not;
       2(i) If yes, then whether instructions have been issued by the Law Ministry to other
       Departments for keeping such cases in abeyance or not; and



                                                                                 Page 13 of 25

        2(ii) If not please cite the rules under which the Departmental proceedings can be
       conducted over-riding the above judgments."

The Commission while disposing of the second appeal vide its decision dated 09.09.2011
made the following observations:

 
"4. After hearing the respondent and on perusal of relevant documents, the Commission
       observes that the appellant sought legal opinion from respondent; the same is not
       covered within the ambit of the definition of 'information' as 
laid down in
 
Section 2(f)
 of
       the RTI Act. The Commission finds no reason to disagree with the replies of
       respondent."


6.2.   
In    
Sarojini      Devi     vs     Life     Insurance      Corporation       of     India
[CIC/LICOI/A/2017/1769933-BJ
], the appellant filed an RTI application dated
21.08.2017 seeking information on 05 points regarding the modified policy and practice
of LIC in view of the Supreme Court Judgment which had held in 2014 that no
Government Department/ Government Corporation will apply 
Public Premises Act (PP
Act
) to protected tenants who were in possession of the premises before 1958, list of
cases under trial by LIC Estate Officer under 
PP Act
 which had been discharged/
cancelled by LIC and premises returned to rightful protected tenant in light of the above
mentioned Supreme Court Judgment, etc.
 The Commission vide its decision dated
05.04.2019 while disposing of the second appeal and while relying upon the judgment of
the Supreme Court in Khanapuram Gandaiah Vs. Administrative Officer and Ors.
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.34868 OF 2009 (decided on January 4, 2010) made the
following observations.



       6. "....
Under the RTI Act
 "information" is defined under 
Section 2(f)
 which provides:

       "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-
       mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, report,
       papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and information
       relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other
       law for the time being in force."



       This definition shows that an applicant under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act can get any
       information which is already in existence and accessible to the public authority under
       law. Of course, under the 
RTI Act
 an applicant is entitled to get copy of the opinions,
       advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he cannot ask for any information as to why such
       opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc. have been passed."



                                                                                      Page 14 of 25


        7. "....the Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material which is not
       before him; or any information he could have obtained under law. Under 
Section 6
 of the
       RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such information which can be accessed by
       the "public authority" under any other law for the time being in force. The answers
       sought by the petitioner in the application could not have been with the public authority
       nor could he have had access to this information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged
       to give any reasons as to why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was
       before him."



       The Appellant was not present to contest the submissions of the Respondent or to
       establish the larger public interest in disclosure which outweighs the harm to the
       protected interests.



       DECISION:



       Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by the Respondent, no
       further intervention of the Commission is required in the matter."



6.3.   In Smt. Sakshi Sunil Shelke vs. CPIO, Indian Navy, [CIC/RM/A/2014/001665], the
appellant filed an RTI application dated 06.02.2014 seeking information regarding the
number of applications received for the post of Assistant Store Keeper; whether scrutiny
of applications was done by the respondents or by a private firm; if private firm had done
the above job, then name of the firm employed for this purpose, copy of the work order
and copy of approval of the competent authority for delegating this work to a private
firm, etc. The Commission while allowing the appeal passed the following directions
vide its decision dated 19.08.2016:



       "Be that as it may, the CPIO is directed to provide to the appellant point wise complete
       information within 21 days from the date of receipt of the order."



6.4.   In Niraj Kumar vs. CPIO, Staff Selection Commission [CIC/SM/A/2013/000444],
the appellant filed an RTI application who was a candidate in the combined graduate-
level examination 2011 and had sought information regarding cancellation of his
candidature and that he was debarred from appearing in an examination for five years;
various details to find out the reasons why the SSC took such a decision against him. The
Commission while disposing of the appeal passed the following directions vide its
decision dated 07.08.2013:



                                                                                    Page 15 of 25


        "5.We have carefully considered the facts of the case and the submissions       made during
       thehearing. We find it difficult to accept the explanation given by
       the CPIO. After all, some authority in the SSC had decided on the action taken
       against the Appellant and, may be, some others on the charge of adopting
       malpractice in the examination. The candidate has every right to know about
       the reasons for taking such drastic decision against him. Besides, this matter is
       now more than two years old and the enquiry cannot go on indefinitely. It is,
       therefore, necessary that the Appellant is informed about the reasons for such a
       decision, as recorded in file. We direct the CPIO to access this information,
       namely, the photocopy of the relevant file noting and other records from the file
       in which the decision had been taken to cancel his candidature and debar him
       from future examinations for a period of five years, from the SSC headquarters
       and provide to the Appellant within 15 working days of receiving this order."



6.5.   
In 
Mr. B. Venkateswara Rao vs. CPIO, Andhra Bank [CIC/SG/A/2012/001449
],
the RTI appellant filed an application dated 04.11.2011 seeking the following
information:




       "1.Does it not expedient for the bank authorities concerned to verify and ensure that
       everything is in the points after the customer leaves the locker room?



       2. In the period 1-10-11 to 28-10-2011 no efforts to have been evinced to notice the fact
       of tempering of the locker. Can the reasons for this lapse on the part of the concerned
       authorities be permissible as per bank's statutory rules?



       3. Does it not require causing an immaculate intensive check of all the locking devices
       and ensuring safety in a foolproof manner by the Banking officials concerned just before
       they leave precincts of the Bank each day?



       4. Are there any specific rules allowing the bank authorities to engage an unauthorized
       mechanic for the purpose?



       5. Had there been strict surveillance of the bank officials concern throughout the
       operation or this repaired word?



                                                                                       Page 16 of 25


        6. Are there any rules under Bank's Statute to allow a private person in the locker room
       without the surveillance of the bank officials?"



The Commission while disposing of the appeal passed the following directions vide its
decision dated 27.06.2012:



       "The Appeal is partially allowed. The PIO is directed to provide an attested copy of the
       Manual/Rules as directed above to the Appellant before 15 July 2012."



6.6.   In Shri Fasih Akhtar vs. CPIO, Prime Minister's Office [CIC/CC/A/2015/002259],
the appellant filed an RTI application dated 07.10.2014 seeking information on four
points:



       "(i) date of receipt of letter which was sent to the Prime Minister's Office;



       (ii) what action has been taken by the PMO on his representation dt. 8-9-2014 relating
       to prohibition of cow slaughtering;



       (iii) what is the reason why the Prime Minister did not convey congratulations on the
       occasion of Eid Day to the Muslim community; and


       (iv) it is against the Constitutional Rights that on the occasion of Hindu festivals Prime
       Minister conveys congratulations but on the festive occasion of Muslim he does not."



The Commission while disposing of the appeal (vide its decision dated 30.08.2016)
while disposing of the appeal held:



       "The Commission's intervention is not required in the matter. The appeal is disposed of"



6.7.   
In 
Govind Mittal vs. CPIO, National Highway Authority of India, Faridabad
[CIC/SS/A/2012/003439
] the appellant filed an RTI application dated 16.07.2010
seeking information on 3 points:




       "(1) provide information that on how much distance should he
       construct the boundary of his HouseKothi No: 69 which is situated at Gandhi
       Nagar, Agra, U.P near to Highway no: 2 because at present he permission to
       construct boundary of his house at 82 feet away from the main Road of the
       Highway no. 2 from NHAI.

                                                                                       Page 17 of 25


          (2) At what rate compensation will be given for the acquired land by the NHAI?



         (3) Provide information on what distance should he
         construct the main building of his House?"



The Commission while disposing of the appeal passed the following decision dated
29.08.2013:



         "The Commission observes that the queries raised by the appellant in his
         RTI application are more in the nature of seeking advice and clarification whereas under

         the provisions of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 only information as is held by the Respondent in
         material form can be provided. The Respondent are not expected to create information
         or to give advise. The information sought by the Appellant therefore does not qualify as
         information as defined under 
section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005."



6.8.     In     Kothandaraman         Venkataraman         vs.    CPIO,       Bank     of    India
[CIC/BKOIN/A/2017/166537], the appellant filed RTI application dated 17.07.2017
seeking the following information:



        (i)     "Confirmation from telephone service provider for messages delivered from this
               ATM-TCE9038/ triggered by this ATM for my attempted withdrawal transaction no.

               348748 on 8.9.16 and any other sms sent to my phone by your service provider for
               this transaction the same day.

       (ii)    name of telephone service provider for cross verification print out.

       (iii)   Appellant want the calibrated maximum delivery in Rupees machine-TCE9038 can
               deliver per withdrawal transaction, this when was last calibrated before 8.9.16 date
               and value. It can be 15000 or 10000 only.

       (iv)    inspecting this record wherever it is recorded / registered must be in Chennai."



The Commission while disposing of the appeal passed the following decision dated
09.04.2019:



         "6.    The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case,
         hearing both the parties and perusal of records, feels that there is no danger to life of
         any individual as claimed by the respondent under 
section 8 (1) (g)
 of RTI Act           in



                                                                                       Page 18 of 25

           providing information. The information may be supplied within 15 days from the date of
          issue of this order."



6.9.      
In     
Chayan      Ghosh     Chowdhury      vs.     CPIO,   Punjab      &    Sind    Bank
[CIC/PASBK/A/2019/123506
], the appellant filed RTI application seeking the following
information:


                 "Kindly provide the following information with respect to administrative control
               of Zonal Office, Bareilly:

   (i)         Number of employees, cadre wise& year-wise, who have been placed under
               Suspension, since 01.01.2013 to date of providing information.

   (ii)        Total remuneration, cadre-wise & year-wise, paid to suspended employees since
               01.01.2013 to date of providing information.

   (iii)       Certified copies of the rules relied by the bank for review of suspension between
               01.01.2013 to date of providing information.

   (iv)        Name & designation of officials who were members of the Review Committee for
               Suspension during the period 01.01.2013 to date of providing information."
The Commission while disposing of the appeal passed the following directions vide
order dated 20.09.2021:



          "The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case, hearing
          both the parties and perusal of records, observes that the reply given by the respondent
          was incomplete and requisite information in response to point nos. (iii) and (iv) of the
          RTI application had not been provided so far. The stipulated time for transferring the
          RTI application to the concerned Branch having elapsed, it was the responsibility of the
          respondent to obtain the same and provide it to the appellant. Accordingly, the
          respondent is directed that information in respect to point nos. (iii) and (iv) of the RTI
          application be made available to the appellant along with uploading the same under
          
section 4 (1) (b)
 of the RTI Act on their web portal within three weeks from the date of
          receipt of this order. With these observations and directions, the appeal is disposed of."

6.10. Definition of Information under 
RTI Act, 2005


6.10.1 "
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act defines 'Information' as any material in any form,
including records, documents, memos, email, opinion, contract report logbooks, samples,


                                                                                         Page 19 of 25

 models held in any electronic form and information relating to any private body which
can be accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force".



Further, 
Section 2 (i)
 defines the term "record" which includes:



   a) document, manuscript and file

   b) microfilm, microfiche and facsimile copy of a document

   c) reproduction of image or images embodied in such microfilm (whether enlarged or
         not); and

   d) other material produced by a computer or any other device


RTI Act
 provides that only such information is required to be supplied under the Act,
which already exists in material form and is held by the public authority or held under
the control of the public authority. According to the Act, the public information officer is
not to generate or interpret information, nor is he or she to solve problems raised by
applicants or to respond to hypothetical questions.



Further, the term "held by or under the control of public authority" in 
section 2(j)
 of RTI
Act has to be reads in a manner that it effectuates and is in harmony with the term
"information" as defined in 
section 2(f)
.



6.10.2         The definition of "right to information" as given under 
section 2(j)
 in the

RTI Act
 is reproduced as under:



         "2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--

               (a)....

               .

               .

               (j) "right to information" means the right to information accessible under this
               Act which is held by or under the control of any public authority and includes
               the right to--

                       (i) inspection of work, documents, records;

                       (ii) taking notes, extracts, or certified copies of documents or records;

                       (iii) taking certified samples of material;

                                                                                       Page 20 of 25


                        (iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes, video
                       cassettes or in any other electronic mode or through printouts where
                       such information is stored in a computer or in any other device;"

6.10.3          In Institute of chartered accountant of 
India V. Shahunak H. Satya
 and
ors., [CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7571 of 2011] the Supreme Court laid down the following
observations:




         "26. We however agree that it is necessary to make distinction regarding
         information intended to bring transparency to improve accountability and to reduce
         corruption, falling under 
section 4(1)(b)
 and (c) and other information which may not
         have a bearing on accountability or reducing corruption. The competent authorities
         under the 
RTI Act
 will have to maintain a proper balance so that while achieving
         transparency, the demand for information does not reach unmanageable proportions
         affecting other public interests, which include efficient operation of public authorities
         and government, preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information and optimum
         use of limited fiscal resources."



6.10.4       In 
Central Board of Secondary Education & Anr. vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay &
Ors.
 [2011 (8) SCALE 645] the Supreme Court laid down the following observations:




         "
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and existing. This is
         clear from a combined reading of 
section 3
 and the definitions of 'information' and
         'right to information' under clauses (f) and (j) of 
section 2
 of the Act. If a public
         authority has any information in the form of data or analyzed data, or abstracts, or
         statistics, an applicant may access such information, subject to the exemptions in 
section
         8
 of the Act. But where the information sought is not a part of the record of a public
         authority, and where such information is not required to be maintained under any law or
         the rules or regulations of the public authority, the Act does not cast an obligation upon
         the public authority, to collect or collate such non-available information and then
         furnish it to an applicant.



         .

         .



                                                                                       Page 21 of 25


          "....A public authority is also not required to furnish information which require
         drawing of inferences and/or making of assumptions. It is also not required to
         provide 'advice' or 'opinion' to an applicant, nor required to obtain and furnish
         any 'opinion' or 'advice' to an applicant. The reference to 'opinion' or 'advice' in
         the definition of 'information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers to such
         material available in the records of the public authority......."



6.10.5         In Khanapuram Gandaiah V Administrative Officer & Ors. [S.L.P. (Civil)
34868 of 2009], the Supreme Court vide judgment dated 04.01.2010 laid down the
following observations:



         "This definition shows that an applicant under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act can get any
         information which is already in existence and accessible to the public authority under
         law. Of course, under the 
RTI Act
 an applicant is entitled to get copy of the opinions,
         advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he cannot ask for any information as to why such
         opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc. have been passed, especially in matters
         pertaining to judicial decisions. A judge speaks through his judgments or orders
         passed by him. If any party feels aggrieved by the order/judgment passed by a judge,
         the remedy available to such a party is either to challenge the same by way of appeal
         or by revision or any other legally permissible mode. No litigant can be allowed to
         seek information as to why and for what reasons the judge had come to a particular
         decision or conclusion. A judge is not bound to explain later on for what reasons he
         had come to such a conclusion."



6.10.6         In case of 
A.K. Vasudev V. CPIO
, M/o Consumer Affairs, Food & Public
Distribution, New Delhi, it was held that respondent is seeking answers to his questions,
which does not fall within the definition of 'information' as per 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI
Act. The Commission refers to the decision of Hon'ble Bombay High Court at Goa in the
matter of Dr. Celsa Pinto V. Goa State Information Commission (W.P. No. 419 of
2007, decision dated 03.04.2008) wherein it was held as follows: "The definition of
information cannot include within its fold answers to the question "why" which would be
same thing as asking the reason for a justification for a particular thing. The public


                                                                                    Page 22 of 25

 information authorities cannot expect to communicate to the citizen the reason why a
certain thing was done or not done in the sense of a justification because the citizen
makes a requisition about information. Justification are matter within the domain of
adjudicating authorities and cannot properly be classified as information."




6.10.7       In case of 
Poorna Prajna High School V. Central Information
Commission
 it was held that it is mandatory for public authorities to disseminate
information that is accessible to them. As a result, information that a public body has
access to is deemed information under 
Section 2(f)
 of the Right to Information Act,
2005. Here public authority is referred to as the framework or the body under which the
institution is governed.




6.10.8       In case of 
Reserve Bank of India V. Jayantilal Mistry
 the Court briefly
analysed 
section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, which defines information to include "...
information relating to any private body which can accessed by a public authority under
any other law for the time being in force." Using this inclusive definition, the Court
held that, even if a fiduciary relationship existed between the RBI and other banks,

section 2(f)
 would render them accessible to the public."




6.10.9       As per the RTI rules 2012, an application under sub-section (1) of 
Section 6

of the Act shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees ten and shall ordinarily not contain
more than five hundred words, excluding containing address of the Central Public
Information Officer and that of the applicant. Perusal of the application reveals that the
RTI application filed by the complainant has around 1800 words.



6.11 The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case hearing
both the parties and perusal of records observed that material information available with
the bank had already been provided to the appellant in tabulated form vide letter dated on
27.08.2019. Perusal of the RTI application against which the appellant in his RTI
application sought details of NPA in three categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun) of
Mudra loans, disbursal, willful defaulters, recovery process, EPR Platforms, repeat
borrowers, audits, inspections and credit insurance etc. Perusal further reveals that in


                                                                              Page 23 of 25

 most of the cases, the appellant has not sought any material information (document) or
copy of the order instead he has sought confirmation, analytics, details of processes etc.
The appellant requested for confirmation of certain facts mentioned by him in his RTI
application, or had asked the bank for identification of fraud cases from the NPA cases,
etc. The request in nature of confirmation, identification, or clarification were not
covered under the definition of "information" under 
section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act. Thus he
has not sought records or documents which were available in material form in the
custody of the public authority. Besides it is also noted that the appellant has sought
voluminous information on different subjects. The arguments of the appellant with
reference to unreasoned orders of the respondent, non-applicability of provisions of

Section 7(9)
 and 
2(f)
 of the RTI Act, and the information could have been collated on the
basis of reports sent to Reserve Bank of India/Ministry of Finance and that disclosure
was in the interest of transparency/accountability and larger public interest. Thus the
appellant has presumed that authorities should have collated, collected or created the
information as per his format. It is evident from the reply of the respondent that they
have provided point-wise reply/information and wherever they felt have claimed
exemption under provisions of the 
RTI Act
.



6.12 The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in 
Central Board of Secondary Education vs.
Aditya Bandopadhyay
 in Civil Appeal No. 6454 Of 2011 has made the following
observations:-




 37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and right to information are
 intended to be formidable tools in the hands of responsible citizens to fight corruption and
 to bring in transparency and accountability. The provisions of 
RTI Act
 should be enforced
 strictly and all efforts should be made to bring to light the necessary information under
 clause (b) of 
section 4(1)
 of the Act which relates to securing transparency and
 accountability in the working of public authorities and in discouraging corruption. But in
 regard to other information,(that is information other than those enumerated in 
section
 4(1)(b)
 and (c) of the Act), equal importance and emphasis are given to other public
 interests (like confidentiality of sensitive information, fidelity and fiduciary relationships,
 efficient operation of governments, etc.). Indiscriminate and impractical demands or
 directions under 
RTI Act
 for disclosure of all and sundry information (unrelated to
 transparency and accountability in the functioning of public authorities and eradication of


                                                                                    Page 24 of 25

  corruption) would be counter-productive as it will adversely affect the efficiency of the
 administration and result in the executive getting bogged down with the non-productive
 work of collecting and furnishing information. 
The Act
 should not be allowed to be
 misused or abused, to become a tool to obstruct the national development and integration,
 or to destroy the peace, tranquility and harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be
 converted into a tool of oppression or intimidation of honest officials striving to do their
 duty. The nation does not want a scenario where 75% of the staff of public authorities
 spends 75% of their time in collecting and furnishing information to applicants instead of
 discharging their regular duties. The threat of penalties under the 
RTI Act
 and the
 pressure of the authorities under the 
RTI Act
 should not lead to employees of a public
 authorities prioritizing 'information furnishing', at the cost of their normal and regular
 duties.



6.13. In view of the above, there appears to be no public interest in further prolonging the
matter as there is no substance in the appeal calling for intervention by the Commission.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.



      Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.



                                                                                   Sd/-

                                                                             सुरेश चं ा)
                                                          (Suresh Chandra) (सु        ा
                                                                          सूचना आयु )
                                               Information Commissioner (सू
                                                                दनांक/Date: 01.11.2021
Authenticated true copy

R. Sitarama Murthy (आर. सीताराम मूत )
Dy. Registrar (उप पंजीयक)
011-26181927(०११-२६१८१९२७)
Addresses of the parties:
CPIO:
IDBI BANK LTD.
IDBI TOWER,
W.T.C COMPLEX, CUFFE PARADE,
 MUMBAI - 400 005

THE FIRST APPELLATE AUTHORITY,
IDBI BANK LTD., IDBI TOWER,
W.T.C COMPLEX, CUFFE PARADE,
MUMBAI - 400 005

SH. SAMIR SARDANA





                                                                                 Page 25 of 25