[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Vivek Grover vs Reserve Bank Of India on 16 August, 2022


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                           के   ीयसूचनाआयोग
                     Central Information Commission
                         बाबागंगनाथमाग ,मुिनरका
                      Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                      नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीयअपीलसं या/Second Appeal No. CIC/RBIND/A/2020/125741&
CIC/RBIND/A/2020/683457

JM Financial Asset Construction Company           ... अपीलकता /Appellant
Ltd.
Through Authorized Signatory
Mr. Vivek Grover
                                 VERSUS
                                  बनाम
CPIO                                              ... ितवादी/Respondent
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Supervision, Centre-1
World Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade Colaba
Mumbai-400005

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:-

RTI : 12-12-2019           FA    : 02-04-2020          SA      : 03-09-2020
                                                       Hearing: 29-09-
CPIO : 04-03-2020          FAO : 11-06-2020            2020,02-02-2021, 02-
                                                       06-2022&05-08-2022

                                 ORDER

1.    The above mentioned matter had been listed before the Commission for
hearing on 29.09.2020, 02.02.2021 &02.06.2022, wherein the Commission
made following observations:



      "The Commission directs all the parties concerned to file written
      objections, written arguments before the Commission within 2 weeks from
      the date of receipt of this order. That a copy of the said written
      objections/ written arguments should be shared among all the parties
      concerned. That a copy of second appeal along with all the relevant

                                                                   Page 1 of 10

       documents on record including written objections should also be
      provided to the original applicant Ms. Deepti Jatin Thakkar."



2.    In view of the above, the aforesaid matters were thus adjourned and listed
today for further hearing.



Hearing:



3.      Adv. Rohit Gupta (Counsel for Appellant) attended the hearing through
video conferencing. The respondent, Shri Vinod Kumar, APIO/DGM attended
the hearing through video-conferencing. The Original Applicant remained
absent during the hearing.

4.      The written submissions of parties are taken on records.

5.      The Counsel for the appellant has referred the reply provided by CPIO
and order passed by the FAA and submitted that the CPIO, RBI and FAA had
violated the principles of natural justice, as they had not given any personal
hearing to the appellant before passing their decisions in the matter. No reasons
were given for not offering personal hearing in the first appeal. He further
submitted that w.r.t the information sought by the original applicant, RBI has
issued notice under 
section 11 (1)
 of the RTI Act to make representation in
writing as to whether the information sought by Ms. Deepti Jatin Thakkar
should be disclosed or not. The appellant vide their letter dated 07.02.2020, has
objected to provide the requested information to the original applicant. He also
submitted that their application was partly allowed as per the order of CPIO and
FAA has upheld the CPIO's reply. The original applicant is the wife of the
guarantor of the appellant and the information sought is confidential in nature
and should not be disclosed by RBI as the information requested by applicant
would not serve any public interest and had been sought by the applicant for
own private gain which is disclosed, would result in disclosure of commercial
confidential information which can jeopardize competitive position and interest
of the appellant and security receipts holders. The information sought by the
applicant is protected by 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act and hence is required to be
treated as confidential. Subsequently, pursuant to appellant's representation
letter, the CPIO of RBI decided by its order dated 04.03.2020, to share the
quarterly statements of the last 3 quarters of 2019 with applicant in redacted
form without stating any reasons thereof for such disclosure. Though some of
the part of the said quarterly statement is redacted but, still substantial

                                                                       Page 2 of 10

 information as to the name of parties, investors, SR Holders and other
commercial information as to recovery made in various years is still allowed to
be provided to the applicant.

6.     The representative of RBI has submitted that an RTI applicant, Ms.
Deepti Jatin Thakkar, vide an application dated 12.12.2019, sought quarterly
statements of the appellant for the last three quarters of 2019 under the
provisions of the 
RTI Act, 2005
. Since it is a third party information, the CPIO
issued notice dated 20.01.2020 under 
section 11 (1)
 r/w 
section 11 (2)
 of RTI
Act to the appellant. After considering the response dated 07.02.2020 from the
appellant, the CPIO decided to disclose the quarterly statements of the appellant
for the last three quarters of 2019 after redacting the information exempt from
disclosure under 
section 8 (1) (d)
 of the RTI Act. The appellant was informed of
the said decision vide a notice dated 04.03.2020 issued under 
section 11 (3)
 of
the RTI Act. Thereafter the appellant has preferred an appeal before the FAA,
RBI, which was dismissed vide order dated 11.06.2020 on the ground that the
disclosure is subject to appropriate blackout of the information which has to be
withheld under the provisions of the 
RTI Act
. It is submitted that the CPIO has
considered the objections to disclosure put forth by the appellant before the
CPIO. The CPIO, is therefore, complying with the provisions of the 
RTI Act
. It
is further submitted that SCRC1 and SCRC2 (quarterly statements) have been
submitted to the RBI by the appellant for the last three quarters of 2019 under

section 3 (4)
 of the SARFAESI Act and the same is part of records maintained
by RBI. The information is in the possession of the RBI and hence, the same
may be disclosed by the RBI. The information is in the possession of RBI and
hence, the same may be disclosed by the RBI. Further the following
observations of the Hon'bleSupreme Court in RBI vs. Jayantilal N. Mistry
&Ors (2016) 3 SCC 525 are also relevant with regard to the contentions raised
in the appeal:-



      "RBI is supposed to uphold public interest and not the interest of
      individual banks. RBI is clearly not in any fiduciary relationship with any
      bank. RBI has no legal duty to maximise the benefit of any public sector
      or private sector bank, and thus there is no relationship of "trust"

      between them. RBI has statutory duty to uphold the interestof the public
      at large, the depositors, the country's economy and the banking sector.
      Thus, RBI ought to act with transparency and not hide information that

                                                                       Page 3 of 10

       might embarrass individual banks. It is duty bound to comply with the
      provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and disclose the information sought by the
      applicant herein."



Decision:

7.     The Commission, after hearing the submissions of both the parties and
after perusal of records, observes that the original RTI applicant has sought
information regarding certified copy of quarterly statements of the appellant for
the last three quarters of 2019 in respect of Mehek Overseas Ltd. Further, she
has asked the certified copy of the document containing 3 year extension
granted to the appellant, after the 5 year period starting from 20.03.2014 to
20.03.2019 for resolution of acquired assets etc.The CPIO, Reserve Bank of
India had issued notices under 
Section 11(1)
 and 
11(3)
 to the appellant
intending to disclose the information. Aggrieved by the decision of the CPIO,
the appellant had filed first appeal with the First Appellate Authority. The FAA
had also dismissed the first appeal of the appellant summarily. The Commission
observes that the RTI applicant had insisted for disclosure of information as per
Jayantilal N. Mistry's case. The Appellant contested that the information sought
as a whole is exempted from disclosure under 
Section 8 (1) (d)
 and 
8(1) (j)
 of
the RTI Act and that the CPIO/FAA has not passed any reasoned order settling
their objections nor gave any opportunity of hearing to them. The appellant is
agreed with the concept of providing information after redacting the exempted
information as per the provisions of the 
RTI Act
, but they are aggrieved with
the fact that by the order of CPIO and FAA, it is not clear as to what nature of
information will be redacted, hence the reasoned order has not been passed.

8.     The Commission takes note of the submissions made by the appellant that
the quarterly statements of the appellant for the last three quarters of 2019 etc.
contains information of their borrowers or investors along with their personal/
commercial details/ transaction details/ business and operational details etc.The
informationproposed to be disclosed is in the nature of credit information and
the same was supplied to the Reserve Bank of India in fiduciary capacity as the
Regulator under the provisions of the 
Banking Regulation Act
. The large
amount of data relating to its clients including their identity, personal details etc.
is shared with the regulator, without any redaction or withholding the
information, in good faith that these will be objectively analysed in discharge of
their statutory obligations to make fair judgment on their functioning without

                                                                           Page 4 of 10

 affecting their competitive position.To this extent, there is an element of trust
and confidence in sharing the data, both financial and operational, between the
RBI and such financial institution. The information and data of the clients in the
hands of the appellantwhether they are borrowers or investors, also has the
element of trust and confidence that such data will not be disclosed or shared
against their right to privacy/commercial interest and protected under fiduciary
capacity.

9.     The Commission further takes note of the FAA's order referring to the
Jayantilal Mistry's case upholding the decision of CPIO. The ratio of the said
judgment is that annual inspection report/audit reports of bank generated in the
hands of Reserve Bank of India as regulator does not enjoy protection under

Section 8(1)(e)
 of the RTI Act and the relationship between RBI and financial
institutions to that extent cannot be termed as 'fiduciary'. For various issues
involving right to privacy or protection of commercial interests Hon'ble
Supreme Court and High Courts have passed orders amply clarifying disclosure
of such matters under the provisions of 
RTI Act
 and exemption under 
Section
8(1)
 of the Act.

10. Keeping in view the broader nature of business carried out between a
customer and the financial institution, the Commission takes note of the
observations passed by the Supreme Court in 
Central Board Of Sec.
Education &Anr. vs Aditya Bandopadhyay&Ors
 [2011 (8) SCC 497] vide
order dated 09.08.2011 examined and explained the expression 'fiduciary
relationship', and have illustrated a few relationships where parties were
involved in an act of fiduciary capacity including 'customers' in the following
words:


       "20. The term `fiduciary' and `fiduciary relationship' refer to different
       capacities and relationship, involving a common duty or obligation. 20.1)
       Black's Law Dictionary (7th Edition, Page 640) defines `fiduciary
       relationship' thus:



      A relationship in which one person is under a duty to act for the benefit of
      the other on matters within the scope of the relationship. Fiduciary
      relationships - such as trustee-beneficiary, guardian-ward, agent-
      principal, and attorney-client - require the highest duty of care. Fiduciary
      relationships usually arise in one of four situations : (1) when one person
      places trust in the faithful integrity of another, who as a result gains
      superiority or influence over the first, (2) when one person assumes

                                                                       Page 5 of 10

       control and responsibility over another, (3) when one person has a duty
      to act for or give advice to another on matters falling within the scope of
      the relationship, or (4) when there is a specific relationship that has
      traditionally been recognized as involving fiduciary duties, as with a
      lawyer and a client or a stockbroker and a customer."



      "39. The term "fiduciary" refers to a person having a duty to act for the
      benefit of another, showing good faith and candour, where such other
      person reposes trust and special confidence in the person owing or
      discharging the duty. The term "fiduciary relationship" is used to
      describe a situation or transaction where one person (beneficiary) places
      complete confidence in another person (fiduciary) in regard to his affairs,
      business or transaction(s). The term also refers to a person who holds a
      thing in trust for another (beneficiary). The fiduciary is expected to act in
      confidence and for the benefit and advantage of the beneficiary, and use
      good faith and fairness in dealing with the beneficiary or the things
      belonging to the beneficiary. If the beneficiary has entrusted anything to
      the fiduciary, to hold the thing in trust or to execute certain acts in regard
      to or with reference to the entrusted thing, the fiduciary has to act in
      confidence and is expected not to disclose the thing or information to any
      third party."



While taking into consideration the fact that the customers give their financial
information to the financial institutions in confidence and with complete faith
that may not be divulged as a result of disclosure by others, the following
observations passed by the Supreme in Court 
Bihar Public Service
Commission v. Saiyed Hussain Abbas Rizwi and Anr.
[ (2012) 13 SCC 61]
may be relied upon:




      "The satisfaction has to be arrived at by the authorities objectively and
      the "consequences of such disclosure have to be weighed with regard to
      the circumstances of a given case. The decision has to be based on
      objective satisfaction recorded for ensuring that larger public interest
      outweighs unwarranted invasion of privacy or other factors stated in the
      provision. Certain matters, particularly in relation to appointment, are
      required to be dealt with great confidentiality. The information may come
      to knowledge of the authority as a result of disclosure by others who give

                                                                         Page 6 of 10

       that information in confidence and with complete faith, integrity and
      fidelity. Secrecy of such information shall be maintained, thus, bringing it
      within the ambit of fiduciary capacity. Similarly, there may be cases
      where the disclosure has no relationship to any public activity or interest
      or it may even cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of the individual.
      All these protections have to be given their due implementation as they
      spring from statutory exemptions. It is not a decision simpliciter between
      private interest and public interest. It is a matter where a constitutional
      protection is available to a person with regard to the right to privacy.
      Thus, the public interest has to be construed while keeping in mind the
      balance factor between right to privacy and right to information with the
      purpose sought to be achieved and the purpose that would be served in
      the larger public interest, particularly when both these rights emerge
      from the constitutional values under the Constitution of India."

Further, in NareshTrehan vs Rakesh Kumar Gupta [W.P.(C) 85/2010 & CM
Nos.156/2010 & 5560/2011], the Delhi High Court made the following
observations:



      "...It is, thus, essential that information relating to business affairs,
      which is considered to be confidential by an assessee must remain so,
      unless it is necessary in larger public interest to disclose the same. If the
      nature of information is such that disclosure of which may have the
      propensity of harming one's competitive interests, it would not be
      necessary to specifically show as to how disclosure of such information
      would, in fact, harm the competitive interest of a third party. In order to
      test the applicability of 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the Act it is necessary to first
      and foremost determine the nature of information and if the nature of
      information is confidential information relating to the affairs of a private
      entity that is not obliged to be placed in public domain, then it is
      necessary to consider whether its disclosure can possibly have an adverse
      effect on third parties."



11. There are apparently two set of such information which have been shared
by the financial institution with the regulator under statutory obligation. First is
the information/data of clients relating to their business/commercial operations,
financial transactions, business and commercial strategy which is shared by
clients with financial institutions in full trust and confidence and is held by them

                                                                         Page 7 of 10

 in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure under the 
RTI Act
 in their
hands. Second set is the information relating to business strategy, decisions,
transactions, other operational data etc. of financial institution which may have
bearing on their competitive position and also enjoys the exemption from
disclosure in their hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise, under the 
RTI
Act
. The Commission is of the view that the exemption of disclosure of certain
information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of financial
institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in good
faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligations. This aspect is not
the ratio of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's judgment and
decision of the regulator to consider redacting such data/information while
disclosing the reports is to be aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts covering such aspects.

12.      The Commission has also taken a detailed view in file nos.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 &Ors. dated 05.05.2022 wherein issues of
redaction, ratio of Jayantilal Mistry case and other related issues are discussed
in detail. Perusal of the relevant paragraphs in Jayantilal Mistry judgment make
it clear that the fundamental rights enshrined upon the citizens in form of right
to information are not absolute and that the right to information may not draw
precedence         over      right     to      privacy.      Moreover       various
communications/clarifications between RBI as regulator and Banks/ financial
institutions on any subject are with trust and confidence till it results into
inspection or any other report on the subject by the regulator. Issues can't be
prejudged till these are finally concluded by the RBI. Therefore, the Courts need
to strike a balance between the rights as well as protections guaranteed to a
citizen under 
Article 19
 of the Constitution. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India
has held that the disclosure of information relating to banks and financial
institutions may be allowed taking into account the circumstances and nature of
information sought for and not in a blanket manner. The Commission advised
the CPIO to consider taking the relevant references from the said order while
deciding the cases.

13.       The Commission further observes that the CPIO while issuing notice
under 
Section 11
 of the RTI Act has given the opportunity to the appellant to
seek their objections, if any, against disclosure of information but has not found
it necessary to give them an opportunity of hearing. The CPIO has not passed
any reasoned order covering his deliberation on their objections, his

                                                                        Page 8 of 10

 understanding of law or jurisprudence in rejecting specific objections in favor of
disclosure or redaction etc. Orders passed by the CPIO is cryptic and without
any reference to objections raised by the appellant. Similarly, the FAA instead
of passing a speaking order have given a cryptic and vague reply to the
appellant. The CPIO and the FAA have visibly not applied their mind before
issuing the order of intent of disclosing the information. The conduct of the
CPIO and FAA is not in line with the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and principles
of natural justice. Further, no opportunity of hearing was given to the appellant
in order to enable them to make their submissions nor speaking order have been
passed by FAA for not giving such opportunity of hearing or elaborating
reasons for accepting /not accepting their objections. The Commission is of the
view that objections should be specifically dealt and rejected/accepted with
reasons. Further, the order of CPIO and FAA have been passed without any
opportunity of hearing to the appellant but the orders so passed do not reflect
deliberation and understanding of points raised by the appellant not requiring
any personal hearing.

14.      The Commission is of the view that opportunity of hearing should
necessarily be provided and orders passed by the CPIO and the FAA should be
reasoned, speaking and clear. In view of the above, the Commission directs the
CPIO, Reserve Bank of India to re-examine the RTI application of the original
RTI applicant in the light of the observations of the Commission afresh. The
Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various objections
filed by the appellant and submissions made by applicant to reach the decision
in favour or against redaction of various parts of the information sought. He has
to factor the observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry case
and other relevant judgments, some of which have been referred in this order as
well. Hence, with these observations the orders passed by the CPIO and FAA in
this matter is set aside and the case is being remanded to the CPIO for
adjudication afresh keeping in mind the observation, suggestions and directions
given by the Commission vide its full bench decision passed in file nos.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 & Ors. dated 05.05.2022. In case, the
appellant/applicant is aggrieved with the order of the CPIO, they are at the
liberty to file first appeal before the First Appellate Authority and afterwards
second appeal before the Commission.

15. With the above observations, both the appeals are disposed of.



                                                                       Page 9 of 10


 16.   Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.



                                                             नीरजकु मारगु ा)
                                         Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरजकु       ा
                                                                सूचनाआयु )
                                      Information Commissioner (सू

                                                        दनांक / Date : 11-08-2022
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणतस यािपत ित)

S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा ),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),
(011-26105682)


Addresses of the parties:

1.    CPIO
      Reserve Bank of India
      Department of Supervision, Centre-1
      World Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade Colaba
      Mumbai-400005

2.    Mr.Vivek Grover (Appellant)


3.    Ms.Deepti Jain Thakkar (Original Applicant)





                                                                      Page 10 of 10