[Cites 
56
, Cited by 
2
]




Central Information Commission


Sanjay Ramesh Shirodkar vs Ministry Of Civil Aviation on 21 May, 2020


                                     के ीय सूचना आयोग
                              Central Information Commission
                                 बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                               Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                               नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No: CIC/MA/C/2008/000195
Sanjay Ramesh Shirodkar                                           ...अपीलकता/Complainant


                                            बनाम
Mumbai International Airport Ltd.
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport
1st Floor, Terminal 1
Santacruz East,Mumbai - 400099                                  .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

RTI: 04/01/2008           :
                              FA: Nil        : No appeal Complaint : Nil
12.04.2017
CPIO: 13/02/2008          :
                              FAO: Nil        : No order Hearing:      16.12.2019
18.04.2017


                                           ORDER

                                         (18.05.2020)

                                   CORAM
                     HON'BLE IC SHRI DIVYA PRAKASH SINHA
                      HON'BLE IC SHRI SURESH CHANDRA

       The issue under consideration which has eventually copped up following an RTI
dated 04.01.2008, Complaint dated        nil and the High Court of Delhi's Order dated
30.05.2011 is as under:

      Whether the Mumbai International Airport Limited(MIAL) is a Public
       Authority

2.     Succinctly the facts of the case include that the complainant filed an RTI application
dated 11.12.2017 seeking the following information:



                                                                                    Page 1 of 31


       i)     As per Airports Authority of India NOTIFICATION (File No.
             AAA/PERS/EDPA/Reg/2002) who is the "Competent Authority" as
             CSIA-Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai-400099.

      ii)    As per NOTIFICATION (File No. AAA/PERS/EDPA/Reg/2002)and
             mentioned in Section 18 of it, please provide a copy of Policy
             Guideline/Government Resolution/Notification regarding parking or
             waiting of any vehicle of carriage within the Airports and Civil Enclaves
             at CSIA-Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai-400099.

      iii)   Policy Guideline/Government Resolution/Notification, if any exemption
             given    under   Section    18    of    Airports   Authority   of   India
             NOTIFICATION(File No. AAA/PERS/EDPA/Reg/2002) to any one by
             the "Competent Authority" at CSIA-Chhatrapati Shivaji International
             Airport, Mumbai-400099.

2.1   The authorized signatory of the respondent replied on 18.12.2007 informing the
applicant that MIAL was not a public authority and that the RTI Act was not applicable to
it.

2.2   The applicant made another RTI dated 4.1.2008 seeking the following information:

      i)     Who is the "Competent Authority" at CSIA- Chhatrapati Shivaji
             International Airport, Mumbai-400099.

      ii)    Please    provide    a     copy    of    Policy    Guideline/Government
             Resolution/Notification regarding parking or waiting of any vehicle of
             carriage within the Airports and Civil Enclaves at CSIA- Chhatrapati
             Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai-400099.

      iii)   Please    provide    a     copy    of    Policy    Guideline/Government
             Resolution/Notification, if any exemption given to any one by the
             "Competent Authority" at CSIA- Chhatrapati Shivaji International
             Airport, Mumbai-400099.

      iv)    Please provide a copy of all approved rates & brands of Mineral Water
             which is sold at Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport.



                                                                                  Page 2 of 31


          v)    Please specific the exact locations of "Designated VIP car parking
               area" at CSIA- Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai-

               400099.

2.3      The respondent's authorized signatory vide letter dated 13.02.2008 replied and
reiterated their stand taken in their earlier letter dated 18.12.2007. It was also informed that
the matter was sub judice.

Aggrieved by that the complainant filed a complaint on 20.02.2008 which read with the
directions of the High Court order dated 17.05.2019 is under consideration.
2.4      It may also be recalled that the Commission in its order dated 30.05.2011 held as
under:

         "37 We find no hesitancy in declaring MIAL as a Public Authority under
         Clauses (d) and (i) respectively, of 
Section 2(h)
 of the RTI Act. MIAL shall
         appoint a CPIO and FAA within 30 days of the receipt of this Order and shall
         also fulfil the mandate of 
Section 4(1)
 disclosure as mandated under the 
RTI
         Act
, within 2 months of the receipt of this Order"

2.5      Aggrieved by the order dated 30.05.2011 MIAL filed an appeal before the Delhi
High Court. The Delhi High Court in its order dated 17.05.2019 in para 6 observed as
under:

         "6. Accordingly, impugned order is set aside and the matter is remanded back
         to the CIC for a fresh consideration of the issue whether MIAL is a public
         authority within the meaning of 
Section 2(h)
 of the Act. While doing so, CIC
         shall hear the respondent herein as well. The issue being of importance, it
         shall be appropriate that the same is decided as expeditiously as possible, but
         within a period of three months as an outer limit. It is made clear that this
         court has not expressed itself on the merit of the issue, which shall be
         considered by the CIC."

Attendance during the hearing on 16.07.2019:

Complainant: Remained absent.



                                                                                     Page 3 of 31


 Respondent: Abhinav Vashist, Sr. Advocate; N. Nihal Rao, Advocate; Kunal Dutt,
Advocate; Ekta Kapil, Advocate; Akshita Sachdeva, Advocate; P.S. Ganguly (MIAL) and
Ramkrishna Shukla (MIAL) present in person.

Third party: Sanjeev Kumar, AGM (F) & Rep. of CPIO, Airports Authority of India, New
Delhi present in person.

Attendance during the hearing on 02.09.2019:

Complainant: Remained absent.



Respondent: Rajiv Nayyar, Senior Advocate; Ekta Kapil, Advocate; N. Nihal Rao,
Advocate; Kunal Dutta, Advocate; Manjari Raj Gupta, Advocate and P.S. Ganguly, EVP &
Head-Legal (MIAL) present in person.



Third party: Sanjeev Kumar, DGM (F) & Rep. of CPIO, Airports Authority of India, New
Delhi present in person.

Attendance during the hearing on 15.11.2019:

Complainant: Remained absent.



Respondent: Amar Dave, Senior Advocate; Ekta Kapil, Advocate; N. Nihal Rao,
Advocate; Kunal Dutta, Advocate and P.S. Ganguly EVP & Head-Legal (MIAL)
Ramkrishna Shukla (MIAL) present in person.

Third party: Sanjeev Kumar, DGM (F) & Rep. of CPIO, Airports Authority of India, New
Delhi present in person.

Attendance during the hearing on 16.12.2019:

Complainant: Present through Video Conference.

Respondent: Amar Dave, Senior Advocate; Ekta Kapil, Advocate; N. Nihal Rao,
Advocate; Kunal Dutta, Advocate and P.S. Ganguly, EVP & Head-Legal (MIAL)
Ramkrishna Shukla (MIAL) present in person.

Third party: Santosh Kumar Singh, Under Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, New
Delhi and Sanjeev Kumar, DGM (F), Airports Authority of India, New Delhi present in
person.

3.    The complainant while contending his case inter alia submitted that since the term
"substantial funding" had not been defined anywhere in the 
RTI Act
 and as per the


                                                                              Page 4 of 31

 averments of the MIAL that 50% of shareholding constitute to substantial funding, then
Stamp Duty worth Rs.250 crores waived off by the Government of Maharashtra along with
land and infrastructure of 2000 acres worth more than 80,000 crores in Mumbai given on
Rs.100 per year(lease premium), amounted to "substantial funding"; that AAI being the
26% of active partner in this JV had shirked the responsibility answering to public
questions under the 
RTI Act
; that since many years, AAI claiming to be the owner of
Mumbai Airport property always passed the buck to its lessee i.e., MIAL on questions
asked pertaining to owner's land and infrastructure under 
RTI Act
; that the MIAL was an
agent or instrumentality of State and therefore, "State" within the meaning of 
Article 12
 of
the Constitution of India; that the statutory functions performed by the AAI were
enumerated in 
Section 12
 of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994; that the monies
payable by the lessee i.e., MIAL to AAI were public monies and public funds; that MIAL
was performing public functions in public interest; that the MAIL was a part and parcel of
Ministry of Civil Aviation and the entire details pertaining to the JV of AAI and MIAL
should have been in the public domain i.e., in the website of Ministry of Civil Aviation in
compliance with 
Section 4(1)(b)
 of the RTI Act and that the reliance by the respondent
upon many orders and judgements of various Courts in the present matter, were
unnecessary since the subject-matter of the instant RTI Application was very simple.
3.1   Besides,        that complainant invited the respondent to reply as to what difficulty will
be faced by the respondent in the event MIAL is brought under the 
RTI Act
, whether any
pending project will be stalled in doing so, even if the MIAL is considered as a Public
Authority under 
Section 2(h)
 of the RTI Act, they always have a recourse under exemption
clauses i.e., 
Section 8
 and 
9
 of the RTI Act to deny information.
3.2   Complainant stressed on the fact that the Respondent has taken a loan of several
thousands of crores which are taxpayers money and he being a tax payer and a citizen of
this country, many aspects pertaining to MIAL is unknown and since the Government is
involved in the instant subject-matter, 
RTI Act
 should apply by default. He further stated
that he is only acting as a whistle-blower and that he has no personal or vested interest in
the present matter.



                                                                                      Page 5 of 31


 3.3   Complainant relied upon the Hon'ble Commission's order in the matter of Kishan
Lal v. Rohit Prasad, Director (Development and Strategy), Public Health Foundation
of India, New Delhi vide Complaint no. CIC/SG/C/2011/001273 dated 14.02.2012,
wherein the Former Information Commissioner Shri Shailesh Gandhi declared Public
Health Foundation of India as a Public Authority.



3.4   Complainant stated that AAI exercises deep and pervasive control over the affairs of
the Respondent and since AAI is not an ordinary shareholder as it is clear from a perusal of
some of the clauses of the Articles of Association which are summarised as under:



      1.8.1 
Article 7
 provides that the rights attached to various classes of shares may
            be varied only at a meeting at which the AAI nominee is present
      1.8.2 
Article 12
 provides that the shareholding of AAI in MIAL cannot be diluted.

            The said Article further provides that AAI shall have the right to participate
            in any future issue of shares by the MIAL.

      1.8.3 
Article 34
 provides that the consent of AAI shall be obtained as per 
Article
            35
 before shares in the MIAL are transferred by/to a private shareholder.
      1.8.4 
Article 64
 provides that the quorum for meeting relating to Reserved
            Shareholders shall be two members of which at least one member shall be a
            nominee of AAI. 
Article 68
 provides that change of business of the
            Company, change in rights attached to shares, transfer of the undertaking
            of the Company, commencement of action for dissolution and any special
            resolution cannot be given effect to unless approved by the AAI by an
            affirmative vote at the General Meeting. 
Article 112
 contains an identical
            provision in case of Board Meetings.

      1.8.5 
Article 91
 provides that AAI shall have right to appoint a proportionate
            number of Directors on the Board of the MIAL and further that AAI shall
            have a right to appoint at least one Director irrespective of whether it is a
            shareholder of the MIAL.

      1.8.6 Under 
Article 101
, the MIAL may not remove a Director nominated by AAI
            before the expiry of his term.



                                                                                   Page 6 of 31


       1.8.7 By 
Article 107
, the Directors nominated by the AAI have been given the
             power to convene Board meetings and 
Article 110
 states that the quorum
             for Board meeting shall include at least one Director nominated by AAI.
      1.8.8 
Article 115
 provides that AAI shall have right to appoint one nominee on
             every committee and sub-committee of the Board.

      1.8.9 
Article 135(c)
 gives AAI the right to inspect the books, records and
             accounts of the Company and also mandates that AAI shall be provided
             with monthly accounts of the Company.

      1.8.10Article 138 provides that the Auditors of the Company shall be appointed at
             the General Meeting by a Special Resolution with an affirmative vote of
             AAI.



4.    Submissions of the Respondent:

4.1   The respondents while refuting the claims of the complainant inter alia submitted
      that the present case raised substantial questions of law inter alia, in respect of the
      applicability of the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 to private entities, which are engaged in
      and undertake independent and commercial operations.

4.2   In this regard, the Respondent provided a brief background of the instant matter,
      which is as under:

4.2.1 The Government of India issued a Policy on Airport Infrastructure in 1997 the
      objective whereof was upgradation and modernization of infrastructure of the Indian
      airports. Some of the objectives of the said Policy were:
4.2.1.1   To provide a boost to international trade and tourism and enhance the
          country's image in the comity of nations;

4.2.1.2   To provide airport capacity ahead of demand, in order to handle an increasing
          volume of air traffic and to garner the maximum share of traffic in the region;
4.2.1.3   To enhance airport facilities to make the airport user-friendly and achieve
          higher level of customer satisfaction;

4.2.1.4   To provide a market orientation to the present structure, bridge the resource
          gap and encourage greater efficiency and enterprise in the operation of
          airports, through the introduction of private capital and management skills;

                                                                                   Page 7 of 31


 4.2.1.5     To foster the development of a strong airport infrastructure, maintaining a
            balance between the need for economic viability and the objective of equitable
            regional dispersal of infrastructural facilities...; [Emphasis supplied].



4.3      In order to implement the 
Policy, the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994
 was
amended by the 
Airports Authority of India (Amendment) Act, 2003
. Statement of Objects
and Reasons of the Airports Authority of India (Amendment) Act, 2003 inter alia, states:



4.3.1. There is need to improve the standard of services and facilities at the airports to
bring them at par with international standards. To facilitate the process for such
improvement, there is need, both for the infusion of private sector investments as also for
restructuring of airports. This will speed up airport infrastructure development, improve
managerial efficiency, increase local responsiveness and improve service levels. It will, in
turn, generally stimulate the economy by boosting tourism and trade. It has been decided to
undertake the task of restructuring the airports under the Airports Authority of India as
well as to encourage private participation for the Greenfield airports in the country. Since
the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 is applicable to all airports whereas air transport
services are operated or are intended to be operated, significant private sector investments
in such project require an effective legal framework within which the investors would feel
safe and secure about their operational and managerial independence." [Emphasis
supplied]

4.4      Further, the Respondent submitted that the MIAL was incorporated under the
provisions of the 
Companies Act, 1956
 in the year 2006 as a special purpose vehicle to
undertake the operation, management and development of the Mumbai Airport. The private
participants own 74% of the equity share capital and majority management rights in MIAL
and the rest 26% of the equity share capital is held by the Airport Authority of India. He
further submitted a detail of the shareholders of MIAL, which has been reproduced as
under:



                       Shareholder                   Percentage of Holding
                     Private Participants (including their nominees)
          GVK Airport Holdings Pvt. Ltd.                     50.50%
          Bid Services Division (Mauritius) Ltd.             13.50%

                                                                                      Page 8 of 31

        ACSA Global Ltd.                                    10.00%
       Sub Total                                              74%
                                 Pubic Participant
      Airports Authority of India                        26%
      Total                                           100%

4.5   Upon the instance of the Bench, Advocate of the Respondent submitted that the
significance of having 26% of shareholding with AAI is on the basis of Special Resolution
as per 
Companies Act
. He further submitted that pursuant to the grant of concession, MIAL
entered into an Operation, Management and Development Agreement (OMDA) on
04.04.2006 with the Airports Authority of India (AAI) for the operation, maintenance,
development, design, construction, upgradation, modernization, financing and management
of the Mumbai Airport. As a part of the concession, MIAL in addition to OMDA executed
the State Support Agreement (SSA), Shareholders Agreement, Lease Deed etc. which are
defined as "Project Agreements" under the OMDA. Article 20.3.2 of the OMDA
categorically mentions that the OMDA represents the entire understanding between the
parties i.e., MIAL and AAI, in relation thereto and in the event of a conflict between the
terms of OMDA and of any Project Agreements, the terms of the OMDA shall prevail.

Hence, to understand and appreciate the unique status and position of MIAL vis-à-vis AAI,
the OMDA would be the guiding document and not any other extraneous documents. The
OMDA forms the basis of the relationship between MIAL and AAI and defines the specific
rights and obligations of MIAL. The OMDA, being the parent document, takes precedence
over other documents.



4.6   Upon the instance of the Bench, Advocate of the Respondent submitted that 
Article
90
 and 
91
 of OMDA categorically states as under:



      90. Maximum number of Directors: The Company shall have maximum number
      of twelve Directors. Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Company may
      increase or reduce the number of Directors.



      91. Composition of Board of Directors: The Board shall comprise as under:



            (a) AAI shall have the right to nominate such number of Directors as is
            proportionate to its equity shareholding in the Company subject to a
            minimum of one Director. For abundant clarity, it is expressly set out here

                                                                                Page 9 of 31

             that the aforesaid right of AAI to nominate one director to the Board shall
            subsist and survive irrespective of AAI not being a Shareholder in the
            Company.



            (b) Private Participants shall have the right to nominate the remaining
            Directors.



      Any fraction of a number or decimal numbers shall, while determining the
      entitlement of AAI and each of the Private Participant to nominate Directors, be
      rounded off to the nearest integer number.



4.7   Upon the instance of the Bench regarding the strength of the existing Directors,
Advocate of the Respondent submitted that as on the present date, out of 12 Directors, 9 are
from MIAL and the remaining 3 are from AAI. In addition, Advocate of the Respondent
explained that under the Shareholder Agreement, the Directors representing the private
parties constitute the majority. The Managing Director and Chairman of MIAL are also
nominated by the private participants. The Shareholders Agreement would make it amply
clear that neither the Central Government nor the State Government exercise control over
the management of the affairs of or financial control over MIAL. He specifically
demarcated to the following clauses of the Shareholders Agreement between all
shareholders of MIAL:



      "5.3.1 The Parties hereby undertake and agree that till such time as the
      Private Participants in the aggregate hold more than fifty (50) percent of the
      total paid up and outstanding equity share capital of the JVC, they shall have
      the right to nominate the Chairman of the JVC, who shall be appointed by the
      Board.



      5.4.1 The Private Participants shall also nominate the Managing Director of
      the JVC, who shall, following a Board resolution, be appointed by the Board.
      The Managing Director shall not be liable to retire by rotation. The term of
      each appointment for the Managing Director shall be for such period as
      would be decided by the Board from time to time and subject to a details



                                                                                 Page 10 of 31

       employment agreement (if considered necessary by the Board) with the
      appointee."



      4.8      Subsequently, the Respondent explicated the interpretation and applicability of
      
RTI Act
 on MIAL with specific reference to the term "Public Authority" which has
      been defined in 
Section 2(h)
 of the RTI Act as under:



            "
Section 2
. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-

               (h) "public authority" means any authority or body or institution of self-
               government established or constituted -

                     (a) by or under the Constitution;

                     (b) by any other law made by Parliament;

                     (c) by any other law made by State Legislature;

                     (d) by notification issued or order made by the appropriate
                     Government, and includes any -

                            (i)    body owned, controlled or substantially financed;

                            (ii)   non-Government organization substantially financed,
                                   directly or indirectly by funds provided by the
                                   appropriate Government;"



4.9   The Respondent, further, submitted that the pre-requisites contemplated under

Section 2(h)
 of the RTI Act were mandatory in nature and must have been demonstrably
existed in the facts of a case to make the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 applicable in the first
place. He further submitted that the MIAL was a company of which majority shareholding
(74%) was owned and controlled by private parties. He explained that the MIAL used to
undertake its operations purely on professional and competitive norms, and endeavoured to
generate revenues and profits with the objective of future expansion and growth for the
benefit of the stakeholders and that the requisite ingredients for the application of the Act
was absent. He furthermore submitted that the 
RTI Act
 itself laid the contours of its
applicability and could not therefore be made applicable in all cases and situations
overriding the clear legislative intent. Doing so would not only amount to re-legislating but
would also result in disturbing the other aspects which have been considered by the


                                                                                     Page 11 of 31

 legislature such as a bundle of conflicting recognised rights, e.g., the parallel right to
privacy, right to do business freely etc. at the time of enacting the 
RTI Act
. Bypassing these
necessary checks and balances by re-legislating the 
RTI Act
 under the guise of
interpretation would result in a chaotic and irreconcilable position which was clearly not
permitted under Law. In this regard, the Respondent relied upon the judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of Thalappalam Ser. 
Coop. Bank Ltd. and Ors. Vs.
State of Kerala and Ors.
 [(2013) 16 SCC 82]. The relevant observations reads as under:


 
"27. Legislature, in its wisdom, while defining the expression "public
      authority" under 
Section 2(h)
, intended to embrace only those categories, which
      are specifically included, unless the context of the Act otherwise requires. 
Section
      2(h)
 has used the expressions 'means' and 'includes'. When a word is defined to
      'mean' something, the definition is prima facie restrictive and where the word is
      defined to 'include' some other thing the definition is prima face extensive. But
      when both the expressions "means" and "includes" are used, the categories
      mentioned there would exhaust themselves. Meanings of the expressions 'means'
      and 'includes' have been explained by this Court in 
Delhi Development
      Authority v. Bhola Nath Sharma (Dead) by LRs and others
 (2011) 2 SCC 54,
      (in paras 25 to 28). When such expressions are used, they may afford an
      exhaustive explanation of the meaning which for the purpose of the Act, must
      invariably be attached to those words and expressions.


      28.    
Section 2(h)
 exhausts the categories mentioned therein. The former part of
      
Section 2(h)
 deals with:

             (1) an authority or body or institution of self-government established by or
             under the Constitution,
             (2) an authority or body or institution of self-government established or
             constituted by any other law made by Parliament,
             (3) an authority or body or institution of self-government established or
             constituted by any other law made by the State Legislature, and





                                                                                  Page 12 of 31

                (4) an authority or body or institution of self-government established or
               constituted by notification, issued or order made by the appropriate
               Government.

4.10 Consequently, Advocate of the Respondent submitted that the Right to Information
was not an absolute right and that the MIAL operated in a competitive field and therefore
had to ensure confidentiality, which if breached would result in irreparable damage or in
some cases would adversely affect its operations. He further submitted that for various
reasons, the provisions of 
RTI Act
 itself contained limitations on its applicability and
consciously did not apply in all cases including, to private entities. He furthermore
submitted that MIAL had been formed under a Public Private Partnership model to bridge
the resource gap and encouraged greater efficiency and enterprise in the operation of
airports, through the introduction of private capital and management skills.



4.11 As per the oral directions of the Bench during the proceedings held on 16.07.2019,
Advocate of the Respondent produced a copy of Guidelines on Establishing Joint Ventures
in Infrastructure Sectors published by The Secretariat for the Committee on Infrastructure,
Planning Commission, Government of India. He also produced a copy of the following:



      2.11.1         Aircraft movements under various heads such as:



               2.11.1.1    International (Scheduled and Non-Scheduled);
               2.11.1.2    Domestic (Scheduled and Non-Scheduled); and
               2.11.1.3    General Aviation (Defence and Business) at Mumbai
                           Airport for the period from 2014-15 to 2018-19;

      2.11.2         Passenger movements under various heads such as:



               2.11.2.1    International (Embarked, Disembarked and Transit);
               2.11.2.2    Domestic (Embarked and Disembarked) at Mumbai Airport
                           for the period from 2014-15 to 2018-19

      2.11.3       No. of Airlines operating at Mumbai Airport classified into:

            2.11.3.1     International (Passenger and Freighter); and
               2.11.3.2    Domestic (Passenger and Freighter) at Mumbai Airport for
                           the period from 2014-15 to 2018-19.

                                                                                 Page 13 of 31


 4.12 Advocate of the Respondent in order to explain the Grant of Function to the JVC, he
elucidated on the scope of Grant which has been categorically mentioned at Chapter II of
the OMDA, that states as under:



      "2.1 Grant of Function

      1.1.1 AAI hereby grants to the JVC, the exclusive right and authority during
            the Term to undertake some of the functions of the AAI being the
            functions   of    operation,   maintenance,     development,    design,
            construction, upgradation, modernization, finance and management of
            the Airport and to perform services and activities constituting
            Aeronautical Services, and Non-Aeronautical Services (but excluding
            Reserved Activities) at the Airport and the JVC hereby agrees to
            undertake the functions of operation, maintenance, development,
            design, construction, upgradation, modernization, finance and
            management of the Airport and at all times keep in good repair and
            operating condition the Airport and to perform services and activities
            constituting Aeronautical Services and non-Aeronautical Services (but
            excluding Reserved Activities) at the Airport, in accordance with the
            terms and conditions of this Agreement (the "Grant").
      1.1.2 Without prejudice to the aforesaid, AAI recognizes the exclusive right
            of the JVC during the Term, in accordance with the terms and
            conditions of this Agreement, to:

            (i)    develop, finance, design, construct, modernize, operate,
                   maintain, use and regulate the use by third parties of the
                   Airport;

            (ii)   enjoy complete and uninterrupted possession and control of the
                   Airport Site and the Existing Assets for the purpose of providing
                   Aeronautical Services and Non-Aeronautical Services;



                                                                                Page 14 of 31


              (iii)   determine, demand, collect, retain and appropriate charges
                     from the users of the Airport in accordance with Article 12
                     hereto; and

             (iv)    Contract and/or sub contract with third parties to undertake
                     functions on behalf of the JVC, and sub-lease and/or license the
                     Demised Premises in accordance with Article 8.5.7.



4.13 In continuation, Advocate of the Respondent stressed upon the fact by referring to
the Guidelines on Establishing Joint Ventures in Infrastructure Sectors that Rule 7
categorically deals with shareholding in a JV. Rule 7.1 and 7.2 states as under:



      "7.1 The share of the public sector entity in a JV could be in any
      proportion, say 74:26, 50:50 or 40:60 etc. If the public sector entity owns
      more than 50 per cent share, the JV would be regarded as a public sector
      entity. However, if the share of public sector entity is 50 per cent or less,
      then the JV is a private sector company and would therefore, not be
      accountable to the Government, Public Accounts Committee, Public
      Undertakings Committee, C&AG, etc. Nor would the Government rules
      relating to procurement and expenditure apply to such a JV. Such a JV must,
      therefore, be treated at par with other private companies and any
      procurement of goods or services from such a JV must follow the normal
      tendering processes as per GFR.



      7.2    The share of public sector entity is often kept at 50 per cent or less so
      as to enable the JV to function as a private sector entity with greater
      commercial freedom. However, this implies that though the public
      exchequer would contribute to the equity of such an enterprise, it would
      hardly exercise control over its functioning. It should be borne in mind that
      private sector entities would find such a JV to be more attractive as it would
      provide them with government funds and support without any accountability
      as noted above. It could also give them an undue advantage in government
      procurement as a JV would often be perceived to be a government or semi-



                                                                                   Page 15 of 31


        government company. Such possibilities of undue advantage or vitiating of
       the government procurement process should be identified and eliminated in
       case a JV is proposed to be formed.



4.14 In addition, Advocate of the Respondent explained the actuality of MIAL having
been not established or constituted under the Constitution or by the Legislature etc, the
same was not 'Public Authority'. He submitted that notification or order contemplated in
the said provision i.e., 
Section 2(h)(d)
 must have a direct effect of constituting or
establishing the said body, as is abundantly clear from a plain reading of the language of the
said Section. 
Section 2(h)(d)
 contemplates a direct notification or order under which the
body    is   established   or   constituted.   It   does    not   contemplate     any    such
formation/establishment by way of implication. In the absence of the same, the mandatory
pre-requisites of 
Section 2(h)
 of the RTI Act would certainly not get fulfilled and
consequently the same would not be applicable. The preceding categories dealing with the
constitution of a body by enactment of law, etc. also threw light on thas aspect and
demonstrated that what was contemplated was a specific notification directly resulting in
the constitution of the body.



4.15 He further submitted that the AAI was a statutory corporation completely distinct
from the Central Government as held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of

Municipal Commissioner of Dum Dum Municipality and Ors. vs. Indian Tourism
Development Corporation and Ors.
 (1995 SCC (5) 251).




4.16 He furthermore submitted that MIAL was not "controlled" either directly or
indirectly by the appropriate government. With regard to the term, "controlled", the same
had been construed in various judicial pronouncements and also in the judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of Thalappalam Ser. 
Coop. Bank Ltd. and Ors. Vs.
State of Kerala and Ors.
 [(2013) 16 SCC 82] in the context of the 
RTI Act
 itself wherein
the Hon'ble Court observed as under:




       "31. ...

       (a)   ...

       (b)   ...

                                                                                  Page 16 of 31


 A body which is controlled by the appropriate government can fall under the
definition of public authority under Section 2h(d)(i). Let us examine the meaning
of the expression "controlled" in the context of 
RTI Act
 and not in the context of
the expression "controlled" judicially interpreted while examining the scope of
the expression "State" under 
Article 12
 of the Constitution or in the context of
maintainability of a writ against a body or authority under 
Article 226
 of the
Constitution of India. The word "control" or "controlled" has not been defined
in the 
RTI Act
, and hence, we have to understand the scope of the expression
'controlled' in the context of the words which exist prior and subsequent i.e.
"body owned" and "substantially financed" respectively. The meaning of the
word "control" has come up for consideration in several cases before this Court
in different contexts. 
In 
State of West Bengal v. Nripendra Nath Bagchi
, AIR
1966 SC 447 while interpreting the scope of 
Article 235
 of the Constitution of
India, which confers control by the High Court over District Courts, this Court
held that the word "control" includes the power to take disciplinary action and
all other incidental or consequential steps to effectuate this end and made the
following observations:




      "The word 'control', as we have seen, was used for the first time in the
      Constitution and it is accompanied by the word 'vest' which is a strong
      word. It shows that the High Court is made the sole custodian of the
      control over the judiciary. Control, therefore, is not merely the power to
      arrange the day-to-day working of the court but contemplates disciplinary
      jurisdiction over the presiding Judge.... In our judgment, the control
      which is vested in the High Court is a complete control subject only to the
      power of the Governor in the matter of appointment (including dismissal
      and removal) and posting and promotion of District Judges. Within the
      exercise of the control vested in the High Court, the High Court can hold
      enquiries, impose punishments other than dismissal or removal, ..."



 
32.    The above position has been reiterated by this Court in 
Chief
      Justice of Andhra Pradesh and others v. L.V.A. Dixitulu and others


                                                                           Page 17 of 31

             (1979) 2 SCC 34.
 
In 
Corporation of the City of Nagpur Civil Lines,
            Nagpur and another v. Ramchandra and others
 (1981) 2 SCC 714, while
            interpreting the provisions of 
Section 59(3)
 of the City of Nagpur
            Corporation Act, 1948, this Court held as follows:




            "4.    It is thus now settled by this Court that the term "control" is of a
            very wide connotation and amplitude and includes a large variety of
            powers which are incidental or consequential to achieve the powers-
            vested in the authority concerned......."



4.17 Advocate of the Respondent submitted that the perusal of the above left no room for
doubt that the term "controlled" envisioned substantial control and not mere regulatory or
supervisory nature of control. In the present case, no such substantive control could be
established. In fact, MIAL was a closely held company undertaking its business operations
with commercial and professional objectives. It took independent decisions pertaining to
management and operations. Admittedly, the professionally appointed persons in MIAL
used to take decisions for the benefit of the company and were guided by professional
norms. He further submitted that like every other industry, aviation industry was also
regulated, for instance by AERA i.e., Airports Economic Regulatory Authority. Merely on
the basis of the fact that MIAL was engaged in a regulated industry could not be a ground
to hold the same a 'Public Authority'. While the aviation industry was regulated by AERA,
the day-to-day operations of MIAL were not regulated by AERA. He furthermore
submitted that it could not be also lost sight of the fact that, a regulatory mechanism
virtually engulfed any entity existing in some form or the other and hence if that was sought
to be read in as a criteria in the 
RTI Act
, not only would the same be an exercise of re-
legislation, but would make the same unworkable.



4.18 Subsequently, Advocate of the Respondent submitted that the aspect of "controlled"
has been elucidated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Thalappalam (supra).
The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced as under:



      "34. We are of the opinion that when we test the meaning of expression
      "controlled" which figures in between the words "body owned" and

                                                                                 Page 18 of 31

       "substantially financed", the control by the appropriate government must be a
      control of a substantial nature. The mere 'supervision' or 'regulation' as such by
      a statute or otherwise of a body would not make that body a "public authority"

      within the meaning of 
Section 2(h)(d)(i)
 of the RTI Act. In other words just like a
      body owned or body substantially financed by the appropriate government, the
      control of the body by the appropriate government would also be substantial and
      not merely supervisory or regulatory. Powers exercised by the Registrar of
      Cooperative Societies and others under the 
Cooperative Societies Act
 are only
      regulatory or supervisory in nature, which will not amount to dominating or
      interfering with the management or affairs of the society so as to be controlled.
      Management and control are statutorily conferred on the Management Committee
      or the Board of Directors of the Society by the respective 
Cooperative Societies
      Act
 and not on the authorities under the 
Co-operative Societies Act
.



      35.   We are, therefore of the view that the word "controlled" used in 
Section
      2(h)(d)(i)
 of the Act has to be understood in the context in which it has been used
      vis-à-vis a body owned or substantially financed by the appropriate government,
      that is the control of the body is of such a degree which amounts to substantial
      control over the management and affairs of the body."



4.19 In addition, Advocate of the Respondent submitted that the aspect of "substantial
financing" has been explicated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Thalappalam
(supra). The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced as under:



      "36. The words "substantially financed" have been sued in 
Section 2(h)(d)(i)
 &

      (ii), while defining the expression public authority as well as in 
Section 2(a)
 of the
      Act, while defining the expression "appropriate Government". A body can be
      substantially financed, directly or indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate
      Government. The expression "substantially financed", as such, has not been
      defined under the Act. "Substantial" means "in a substantial manner so as to be
      substantial". In Palser v. Grimling (1948) 1 All ER 1, 11 (HL), while interpreting
      the provisions of Section 10(1) of the Rent and Mortgage Interest Restrictions Act,


                                                                                   Page 19 of 31

 1923, the House of Lords held that "substantial" is not the same as "not
unsubstantial" i.e. just enough to avoid the de minimis principle. The word
"substantial" literally means solid, massive etc. Legislature has used the
expression "substantially financed" in 
Section 2(h)(d)(i)
 and (ii) indicating that
the degree of financing must be actual, existing, positive and real to a substantial
extent, not moderate, ordinary, tolerable etc.


37.   We often use the expressions "questions of law" and "substantial questions
of law" and explain that any question of law affecting the right of parties would
not by itself be a substantial question of law. In Black's Law Dictionary (6th
Edn.), the word 'substantial' is defined as 'of real worth and importance; of
considerable value; valuable Belonging to substance; actually existing; real: not
seeming or imaginary; not illusive; solid; true; veritable. Something worthwhile
as distinguished from something without value or merely nominal. Synonymous
with material.' The word 'substantially' has been defined to mean 'essentially;

without material qualification; in the main; in substance; materially.' In the
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (5th Edn.), the word 'substantial' means 'of
ample or considerable amount of size; sizeable, fairly large; having solid worth
or value, of real significance; sold; weighty; important, worthwhile; of an act,
measure etc. having force or effect, effective, through.' The word 'substantially'
has been defined to mean 'in substance; as a substantial thing or being;
essentially, intrinsically.' Therefore the word 'substantial' is not synonymous with
'dominant' or 'majority'. It is closer to 'material' or 'important' or 'of
considerable value.' 'Substantially' is closer to 'essentially'. Both words can
signify varying degrees depending on the context.



38.   Merely providing subsidiaries, grants, exemptions, privileges etc., as such,
cannot be said to be providing funding to a substantial extent, unless the record
shows that the funding was so substantial to the body which practically runs by
such funding and but for such funding, it would struggle to exist. The State may
also float many schemes generally for the betterment and welfare of the
cooperative sector like deposit guarantee scheme, scheme of assistance from

                                                                           Page 20 of 31

       NABARD etc., but those facilities or assistance cannot be termed as
      "substantially financed" by the State Government to bring the body with the fold
      of "public authority" under 
Section 2(h)(d)(i)
 of the Act. But, there are instance,
      where private educational institutions getting ninety five per cent grant-in-aid
      from the appropriate government, may answer the definition of public authority
      under 
Section 2(h)(d)(i)
.



4.20 Upon the instance of the Bench, the Advocate of the Respondent concluded his
submissions that 28.7% of projected revenue is being financed from Airports Authority of
India and about 9000 crores have been paid by the Mumbai International Airport Ltd.



4.21 Advocate of the Respondent in response to the claim of the Complainant submitted
that the Complainant has largely failed in proving the factum that the MIAL was a Public
Authority. In this regard, he further relied upon the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Thalappalam (supra). The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced as under:



      "40. The burden to show that a body is owned, controlled or substantially
      financed or that a non-government organization is substantially financed directly
      or indirectly by the funds provided by the appropriate Government is on the
      applicant who seeks information or the appropriate Government and can be
      examined by the State Information Commission or the Central Information
      Commission as the case may be, when the question comes up for consideration. A
      body or NGO is also free to establish that it is not owned, controlled or
      substantially financed directly or indirectly by the appropriate Government.



      41.   Powers have been conferred on the Central Information Commissioner or
      the State Information Commissioner under 
Section 18
 of the Act to inquire into any
      complaint received from any person and the reason for the refusal to access to any
      information requested from a body owned, controlled or substantially financed, or
      a non-government organization substantially financed directly or indirectly by the
      funds provided by the appropriate Government. 
Section 19
 of the Act provides for
      an appeal against the decision of the Central Information Officer of the State
      Information Officer to such officer who is senior in rank to the Central Information

                                                                                 Page 21 of 31

       Officer or the State Information Officer, as the case may be, in each public
      authority. Therefore, there is inbuilt mechanism in the Act itself to examine
      whether a body is owned, controlled or substantially financed or an NGO is
      substantially finance, directly or indirectly, by funds provided by the appropriate
      authority.



4.22 Adding on to it, Advocate of the Respondent submitted that with reference to the
26% shareholding of MIAL, it is stated that it does not constitute substantial financing as in
the case of Col. P.K. Garg v. Care Homes Limited (CIC/A/523/ICPB/2007) wherein the
Hon'ble Commission has held that the percentage of shareholding held by the Life
Insurance Corporation (a Public Authority) was 39.14% and yet the same was not found to
be germane to the issue of the company being a "Public Authority" under the provisions of
the 
RTI Act
. Most importantly, there is not an iota of evidence brought on record by the
Complainant to establish any financial assistance or loan having been extended by the
Central Government to AAI for the purpose of acquiring 26% shareholding in MIAL. He
further submitted that with regard to the lease granted by AAI to MIAL at a concessional
rate, it was stated that the basis of the concession was the revenue sharing model wherein
38.7% of the projected pre-tax gross revenue was paid by MIAL to AAI as Annual Fee (in
addition to Rs. 150 crores paid by MIAL to AAI as a non-refundable upfront fee). In terms
of the provisions, MIAL had paid over 9,635.29 crores to AAI in the last 13 years, of which
Rs. 1437 crores was given in the year 2018-19 as annual fee. The relation subsisting
between AAI and MIAL was purely commercial in nature. He reiterated that a higher
revenue share coupled with technical competence were the determining factors towards
selection of the successful bidder and not lease rent.

4.23 Finally, Advocate of the Respondent relied upon an order of the Commission in the
matter of D.K. Soni v. Apollo Hospital (CIC/AD/A/2009/000964) wherein it was held that
the grant of land on lease at concessional rate was not a necessary parameter for purposes
of deciding the status of a body as a "Public Authority", especially when the hospital in that
case was required to treat some percentage of patients free.

5.    The main grievance of the complainant was that the respondent company namely the
MIAL, being government company or instrumentality of the State under 
article 12
 of the

                                                                                  Page 22 of 31

 constitution was 'public authority' under the provisions of 
section 2(h)
 of the RTI Act,
2005 and thus bound by the provisions of the 
RTI Act
, to appoint central public information
officers with a duty to disclose information as per mandate of the 
RTI Act
. 
Section 2(h)
 of
the RTI Act, reads as under:



      "2.   In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-



      a)    .......................



      .................................



      ................................



      (h)   "public authority" means any authority or body or institution of self-

       government established or constituted-



      (a)   by or under the Constitution;



      (b)   by any other law made by Parliament;



      (c)   by any other law made by State Legislature;



      (d)   by notification issued or order made by the appropriate Government,
       and includes any-



            body-owned, controlled or substantially financed;



            (i)    non-Government organization substantially financed, directly or
            indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate Government.



5.1   It is an admitted fact that the MIAL has not been established or constituted by or
under the constitution or by any other law made by Parliament or by State Legislature. It
has been incorporated as company under the provisions of the 
Companies Act
 1956
wherein private participation is 74% and the remaining 26% is with AAI. The only issue
for the consideration of the Commission was whether the MIAL fell within the ambit of the
provisions of sub clause (d) of clause (h) of 
section 2
 of the RTI Act or not. It had also
been contended vehemently by the complainant on the strength of various judicial


                                                                                Page 23 of 31

 pronouncements that MIAL was a "State" under 
article 12
 of the constitution. We may
discuss the same for clarity on the subject.



5.2   The object of defining 'State' under 
Article 12
 of the Constitution is to put
restrictions on the 'public authorities' and ensure that they abide by the mandate of 'Part
III' (Fundamental Rights) and 'Part IV' (Directive Principles of State Policy) of the
Constitution. Such restrictions are not applicable to private bodies (Shamdasoni vs Central
Bank of India AIR.1952 SC 59; 
K.A.Karim Vs ITO
 1983 Tax LR 1168; 
Haji Mohd. Ibrahim
Vs Gift Tax Officer
 1963 Tax LR 1160).




5.3   In Sukhdev Singh Vs Bhagatram AIR 1975 SC 1331, while examining the bodies i.e.
LIC, ONGC and Finance Corporation inter alia held that an autonomous body whether
statutory or non-statutory were found to be a instrumentalities of STATE though these
bodies had independent legal personality on account of being the under control of the
Government.



5.4   In 
Sabhajit Tewary Vs Union of India
 AIR 1975 SC 1329, CSIR was not held as
STATE on the ground that the same was not a statutory body but a society registered under

Societies Registration Act
 though the same was under deep pervasive control and was also
financed by the Government.




5.5   In 
Rajasthan State Electricity Board Vs Mohan Lal
 AIR 1967 SC 1857 though the
RSE Board was carrying commercial activities in distinction with the        Governmental
functions. The same was already to be said on the strength that the Government could
carrying commercial activities under the provisions of 
Article 298
     of the Constitution.


Similarly the principles of instrumentality was discussed in the matter of 
R D Ramana Vs
International Airport Authority of India
 AIR 1979 SC 1628 and Somprakash Vs Union of
India AIR 1981 SC 212.
 
A new judicial trend emerged in the case of 
Ajay Hasia Vs Khalid
Mujib
 AIR 1981 SC 487 wherein the concept of instrumentality or change of the
Government was not held to be limited to a corporation created by a statute but the same
was held to be equally applicable to a company or a society.
 
Thus a registered society was
held an authority for the purpose of 
Article 12
 in contradistinction of 
Sabhajit Tewary


                                                                                Page 24 of 31

 (supra).          The court laid down the following tests to adjudge whether a body is an
instrumentality of government or not:




   i)        If the entire share capital of the body is held by the government;

   ii)       Where the financial assistance given by the government is so large as to meet
             almost entire expenditure of the body;

   iii)      It is a relevant factor if if the body enjoys monopoly status which is conferred or
             protected by the State;

   iv)       Existence of deep and pervasive state control may afford an indication that the
             body is a state instrumentally;

   v)        If the fuctions performed by the body are of public importance and closely related
             to governmental functions.



5.6.      
In the case of 
Central Inland Water Transport Corporation (Corporation
)case
(supra), the facts include that one Brojonath Ganguly was an employee (Deputy Chief
Accounts Officer) in a company namely, the 'Rivers Stream Navigation Company
Limited'. The said Company was taken over by the 'Corporation' in accordance with a
scheme of arrangement. Mr Brojonath, among others, was appointed by the Corporation
after taking over the company in accordance with terms and conditions of the letter of
appointment. The issue which cropped up and came for consideration before the Apex
Court was whether termination of service of a permanent employee (Brojonath and others)
in accordance with Rule 9 of the Service & Disciplinary Rules of the Corporation
(unconscionable term), was legally sustainable. The plea to challenge the order of
termination within 48 hours of the show cause notice, in spite of refutal of the charges, inter
alia included that the Corporation being State might have not breached its duty of acting in
accordance with the provisions of Part III & Part IV of the constitution.




The Supreme Court held-



          "113 We would like to observe here that as the definition of "the State" in
          
Article 12
 is for the purposes of both Part III and Part IV of the Constitution,
          State actions, including actions of the instrumentalities and agencies of the
          State, must not only be in conformity with the Fundamental Rights guaranteed

                                                                                    Page 25 of 31

       by Part III but must also be in accordance with the Directive Principles of State
      Policy prescribed by Part IV. Clause (a) of 
Article 39
 provides that the State
      shall, in particular, direct its policy towards "securing that the citizens, men
      and women, equally have the right to adequate means of livelihood." 
Article 41

      requires the State, within the limits of its economic capacity and development,
      to "make effective provision for securing the right to work". An adequate
      means of livelihood cannot be secured to the citizens by taking away without
      any reason the means of livelihood. The mode of making "effective provision
      for securing the right to work" cannot be by giving employment to a person and
      then without any reason throwing him out of employment. The action of an
      instrumentality or agency of the State, if it frames a service rule such as Clause

      (a) of Rule 9 or a rule analogous thereto would, therefore, not only be violative
      of 
Article 14
 but would also be contrary to the Directive Principles of State
      Policy contained in Clause (a) of 
Article 39
 and in 
Article 41."




5.7   The Central Inland Water Transport Corporation is not only a Government company
as defined under 
section 617
 of the Companies Act 1956, but is wholly owned by the
three Governments- Central Government and the Governments of West Bengal and Assam
jointly. It is financed entirely by these three Governments and is completely under the
control of the Central Government, and is managed by the Chairman and Board of
Directors appointed by the Central Government and removable by it. In every respect it is
thus a veil behind which the Central Government operates through the instrumentality of a
Government company. The activities carried on by the Corporation are of vital national
importance. There can thus be no doubt that the corporation is a Government undertaking in
the public sector.



5.8   In the 
Sabhajit Tiwari
 case(supra), the Supreme Court while holding the Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research(CSIR) not as State under 
article 12
 of the Constitution
relied upon its non-statutory character like those of the Oil and Natural Gas Commission,
or the Life Insurance Corporation(LIC), or the Industrial Finance Corporation(IFC).




                                                                                  Page 26 of 31


 
However, Sabhajit
 (supra) stands overruled by the law 
laid down in
 Pradeep Kumar Biswal
case(2002).




5.9   
Thalappalam Ser.Coop.Bank Ltd.& Ors. vs State Of Kerala & Ors
 [(2013) 16
      SCC 82]
      The Supreme Court of India held that a co-operative society registered under the

Kerala Co-operative Societies Act
 was not bound by the country's 
Right to Information
(RTI) Act
 to provide information sought by a citizen and that the Society did not fall within
the definition of "public authority" under the 
RTI Act
. The Applicant had requested
information relating to the bank accounts of certain members of the Mulloor Rural Co-
operative Society Ltd. The Court reasoned that co-operative societies neither met the
threshold of control by government required under the definition of "the State" in 
Article
12
 of the Constitution nor were "substantially financed" by the government so as to qualify
as a "public authority" under the 
RTI Act
. In balancing the Applicant's right to disclosure
against the privacy rights of the Society's members the Court reasoned that the information
was personal and did not relate to any public activity or interest, so the public authority or
officer was not obliged to comply with the request.




5.10 The Supreme Court in the case of :-



 
DAV College Trust and Management Society and Ors Vs Director of Public
Instructions & Ors
 (Civil Appeal No. 9828 of 2013) while discussing case law and taking
note that various DAV Colleges received grant between 40 to 44% of the total financial
outlay in each year and that as far as work are concerned 95% salary of the teaching and
non-teaching staff of the colleges are borne by the State Government. The Apex Court
found that those were substantial payment and amounted to half of the expenditure of the
Colleges/Schools and more than 95% of the expenditure as far as teaching and other staff
was concerned. Therefore it was held that those colleges and schools were substantially
financed and thus public authority within the meaning of 
Section 2(h)
 of the Act.




5.11 The High Court of Delhi in the case of:-



                                                                                    Page 27 of 31


 
Hardicon Limited Vs Madan Lal
 in W.P.(C) 6946/2011 & CM No. 15943/2011 while
setting aside order dated 21.4.2011 of the full bench of the Central Information
Commission(CIC) observed as:-




     "15. The CIC held that as 61.5% of equity of the petitioner was subscribed
     by government owned entities and the same would meet the criteria of
     substantial financing by an appropriate Government. I find it difficult to agree
     with the said conclusion. Admittedly, the Government - whether it be State
     Government or Central Government - has not provided any direct funding to
     the petitioner. The question whether the entity has been indirectly financed is
     to be determined on the facts of each case. In this case, there is no material to
     indicate any flow of funds from any government to the petitioner. In order to
     hold that an entity has been indirectly financed by an appropriate
     Government, first of all, it is necessary to find that the Central Government
     has parted with some funds for financing the authority/body; and secondly, the
     said funds have found their way to the authority/body in question. The link
     between the financing received by an entity and an appropriate Government
     must be clearly established.



     16.   In this case, there is no material to indicate that any of the funds
     received by the petitioner owed their source to either the Central Government
     or the State Government. The constituent shareholders of the petitioner are
     independent entities and whose source of funds is not limited to the Central
     Government/State Government. Although, substantial part of equity of
     nationalized banks is held by the Government, the sources of funds available
     to the bank are not limited to the Government alone. Banks receives
     substantial deposits as a part of their business. In addition, the banks also
     generate substantial income from their commercial activities. Such funds are
     also deployed by banks by lending and investing in other entities. Since the
     funds received by the petitioner by way of subscription to its equity cannot be
     traced to any Government. The conclusion that the government has indirectly
     provided substantial finance to the petitioner is not sustainable."

                                                                                 Page 28 of 31


 5.12 It may not be out of place to state that, among others, the objective of the 
RTI Act
 is
to place the 'public authority' subject to part III and part IV of the Constitution. Moreover,
as a quasi judicial body the CIC may not include what is not intended by the legislature.

The Supreme Court (2005)4 SCC,649,684) while holding that the Board of Control for
Cricket in India (BCCI) not as 'State' observed that in a democracy there is a dividing line
between a State enterprise and a non-State enterprise, which is distinct and the judiciary
should not be an instrument to erase the said dividing line unless, of course, the
circumstances of the day require it to do so.



5.13 The above discussion makes it amply clear that the evolution of the definition of
'state' under 
article 12
 of the constitution has been subsumed into the definition 'public
authority' and that the obligation of disclosure of information is upon the public authority in
contradistinction of the private body.



6.    The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case, hearing
both the parties and perusal of records, observes that the complainant had not filed second
appeal aggrieved by non receipt of information/reply in response to his RTI application and
first appeal before approaching this commission by way of complaint. Prima facie, it may
not be unreasonable for MIAL to consider itself not covered within the meaning of public
authority under the 
RTI Act
. Keeping in view of the above facts, it might not be proper for
this Commission, on a complaint, where the relief sought had been punishment for not
maintaining a list of CPIOs to punish without holding MIAL a 'public authority' or to treat
complaint as second appeal. The ideal situation should have been that the complainant had
exhausted available remedies i.e. First Appeal and/or Second Appeal. Having been not
declared as 'public authority', MIAL might not be under an obligation to disclose the
information requested for by the complainant nor maintain a list of CPIOs as mandated by
the 
RTI Act
.



6.1   The Supreme Court in the case of 
Chief Information Commissioner and Another Vs
State of Manipur and Another
 [(2011) 15 Supreme Court Cases 1] has held :-




               "The only order which can be passed by the Information Commissioner
      under 
Section 18
 is an order of penalty provided under 
Section 20
. However,


                                                                                   Page 29 of 31

       before such order is passed the Commissioner must be satisfied that the conduct
      of the Information Officer was not bona fide.         The Commissioner while
      entertaining a complaint under 
Section 18
 has no jurisdiction to pass an order
      providing for access to the information.



             The appellant after having applied for information under 
Section 6
 and
      then not having received any reply thereto, it must be deemed that he has been
      refused the information. The remedy for such a person who has been refused
      the information is provided under 
Section 19
 of the Act."



6.2   Now a specific direction has been given by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi to the
Commission to consider afresh and decide whether MIAL is a 'public authority'. In
pursuance of the directions we have reconsidered the issue and heard both parties. The
Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case, hearing both parties
and perusal of records feels that MIAL is not a 'public authority 'under
 S. 2 (h)
 of the RTI
Act, 2005. We are also of the view that it may be open to the complainant to seek
information through public authority for MIAL i.e. AAI or Ministry of Civil Aviation as the
case may be. That being so, the complaint of the complainant is unfounded and the same is
rejected. The Commission puts it on record that it could not meet the timelines provided by
the Hon'ble High Court due to the reasons including Constitution of Bench, non-
appearance of parties and COVID-19 which were procedural and beyond the Commission's
powers.



          Sd/-                                           Sd/-
(Suresh Chandra) (सुरेश चं ा)                    (Divya Prakash Sinha) ( द य काश
 स हा)
Information Commissioner                                        Information Commissioner
 दनांक/Date: 18.05.2020                                            दनांक / Date: 18.05.2020

Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत        त)



(Brig Vipin Chakrawarti) ( गे डयर व पन च वत )


                                                                                 Page 30 of 31

 Registrar (पंजीयक)011-2610502




Addresses of the parties:

The Central Public Information Officer (CPIO),
Ministry of Civil Aviation,
Safdarjung Airport, New Delhi-110003

The Central Public Information Officer (CPIO),
Airport Authority of India, Block-A,
Rajiv Gandhi Bhavan,
New Delhi-110003

The Mumbai International Airport Limited,
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport,
1st Floor, Terminal-1 B,
Santacruz East
Mumbai-400099

Shri Sanjay Ramesh Shirodkar
S.No.669/2 C/1+2 Green Acre,
Flat No.79, Wing E-1, Bibwewadi,
Pune-411 037





                                                     Page 31 of 31


 Page 32 of 31