[Cites 
30
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Thomas Mathew vs Department Of Defence on 12 September, 2023


                                 के   ीयसूचनाआयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                              बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली,
                          नई द ली New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या / Second Appeal No. CIC/MODEF/A/2022/653213

Shri Thomas Mathew                                           ... अपीलकता /Appellant
                                 VERSUS/बनाम

PIO,                                                    ... ितवादीगण /Respondent
M/o Defence

Date of Hearing                       :   24.08.2023
Date of Decision                      :   12.09.2023
Chief Information Commissioner        :   Shri Y. K. Sinha

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:
RTI application filed on          :        25.08.2022
PIO replied on                    :        21.09.2022
First Appeal filed on             :        24.09.2022
First Appellate Order on          :        27.09.2022
2ndAppeal/complaint received on   :        04.10.2022

Information sought
 and background of the case:

 The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 25.08.2022 seeking information on
 the following 02 points:-



1.     Ministry of Defence (Vigilance Cell) had requested the Attorney General of
India in May-July 2022 for his opinion on the Prosecution Sanction in respect of N
Santosh, SA Kunte and Thomas Mathew who have been chargesheeted by the CBI
in the VVIP helicopter scam. Request furnish theresponse of Attorney General on
the said query by Min of Defence (Vigilance)        The related News clipping is
attached.



2.     Request furnish the official responses of the Indian Air Force from 2020 till
date to the Min Of Defence (Vigilance) query with regards to the Prosecution
sanction in respect of N.Santosh, SA Kunte and Thomas Mathew who were
members of the TEC in procurement of VVIP helicopters

The CPIO/Under Secretary (Vigilance), M/o Defence, vide letter dated 21.09.2022
replied as under:-



 Para 1 & 2: With regard to information sought in Para 1 & 2 of your RTI
 application, attention is invited to 
Section 8(h)
 of RTI Act, 2005 which stipulates
 that "there shall be no obligation to give any citizen the information which would


                                                                          Page 1 of 16

  impede the process of investigation or apprehension or prosecution of offenders".
 Hence, no information is being given w.r.t. Para 1 & 2 of ibid RTI application.



Dissatisfied with the response received from the CPIO, the Appellant filed a First
Appeal dated 24.09.2022. The FAA/Deputy Secretary (Vigilance), M/o Defence,
vide order dated 27.09.2022 upheld the reply of the CPIO.



Aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Appellant approached the Commission with the
instant Second Appeal.



Facts emerging in Course of Hearing:



A written submission was received from the Appellant dated 11.08.2023 the
relevant extracts of which are as under:



       4. Information sought in para 2a above is NOT part of the investigation and
       is only an opinion of the AG and does not find mention in the chargesheet.



       5. Information sought vide para 2b above are official communications
       between the MoD and IAF in the years 2020, 2021 and 2022 with regards
       to the technical correctness of the TEC and IAF opinion on granting Sanction
       for Prosecution. These are NOT part of the investigation and do not find
       mention in the chargesheet nor have they been placed in court.



       6. It is humbly reiterated that the information requested in para 2 above is :-

               a) Not part of the investigation and do not find mention in the
               chargesheet

               b) Have not been placed in court

               c) Are addressed to the MoD only and neither to the investigative
               agency nor the court.

               d) Investigation is complete.

               e) Chargesheet has already been filed.

               f) Prosecution process has already been completed. There is no
               Vigilance/Departmental inquiry pending.

               g) No justification has been provided to suggest that releasing of
               requested information will impede the process of investigation and
               prosecution, which is already complete.

               h) Mere fact that release of some information from the records (which
               are not placed in court) may lead to a weakening of the prosecution
               case cannot be advanced as a reason to deny information, since this
               would imply that the truth on records is not being revealed.



       7. With regards to the above, reference is made to Delhi High Court order of
       Amit Kumar Srivastava vs CIC case order of 05 Feb 2021 (Attached as
       Appendix B). Paras 18 and 19 of the said order are reproduced below:



             18. As noted above, the legal position as settled by this court is that
             cogent reasons have to be given by the public authority as to how and
             why the investigation or prosecution will get impaired or hampered by
             giving the information in question. In the impugned order, there is no


                                                                            Page 2 of 16

       attempt made whatsoever to show as to how giving the information
      sought for would hamper the investigation and the on-going
      disciplinary proceedings. The impugned order concludes that a charge
      sheet has been filed in the criminal case by the CBI but in the
      disciplinary proceedings the matter is still pending. Based on this fact
      simplicitor the impugned order accepts the plea of the respondent and
      holds that the 
Section 8 (1) (h)
 is attracted and the respondents are
      justified in not giving information to the petitioner. No reasons are
      spelt out as to how the investigation or prosecution will be hampered.



      19. Accordingly, in my opinion, the order has taken a stand which is
      contrary to the settled legal position by this court as noted above. I,
      accordingly, quash the impugned order of CIC and remand the matter
      back to CIC for consideration afresh in terms of the above noted legal
      position.



8. Reference is also made to Delhi high Court order in the 
B S Mathur vs
Public Information Officer of Delhi High
 Court on 3 June, 2011 (attached as
Appendix C). The scheme of the 
RTI Act
, its objects and reasons indicate
that disclosure of information is the rule and non-disclosure the exception.
Kind attention is drawn towards para 19 and 22 of this order, the excerpts
of which are copied below:




      "The mere reproducing of the wording of the statute would not be
      sufficient when recourse is had to 
Section 8 (1) (h)
 RTI Act. The
      burden is on the public authority to show in what manner the
      disclosure of such information would impede the investigation."

      "The mere pendency of an investigation or inquiry is by itself not a
      sufficient justification for withholding information. It must be shown
      that the disclosure of the information sought would "impede" or even
      on a lesser threshold "hamper" or "interfere with" the investigation."



9. Provision of the requested information will have no adverse effects on the
investigation and would also be incorrect to state that the matter with
regards to this sought information is sub-judice, since they are not part of
the investigation. Additionally, it would go a long way in aiding bonafide
decision making by the Armed forces personnel, future defence procurement
and most importantly the morale of the armed forces personnel.



10. It is humbly submitted that denial or withholding of information under
the technicalities of 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of RTI Act 2005 should not be held valid
in this case and the question of impeding the process of investigation or
apprehension or prosecution of the offenders is unsubstantiated. The
applicability of the term INVESTIGATION should not be interpreted so
broadly and liberally that it leads to selective interpretation by the CPIO and
thereby denying rightful information to the applicants. Such fears
expounded by the MoD are completely baseless and against the principles
of natural justice.



                                                                     Page 3 of 16


        11. Furnishing of requested information is in the larger public good which
       will enable prompt and effective decision making by armed forces personnel
       without fear of victimisation. Denial of requested information is detrimental
       in promoting transparency and adversely affecting the morale of the armed
       forces."



A written submission was also received from the US Vigilance, D/o Defence vide
letter dated 16.08.2023 the relevant extracts of which are as under:



       2. In this regard, Shri Shashi Kant Sharma, one of the co-accused in the
       VVIP helicopter matter had filed an RTI application in the same matter
       seeking copy of related files including but not limited to Department of
       Personnel and Training Office of the Chief Vigilance Commissioner, and any
       others as applicable. The information was denied by the CPIO as well as
       first appellate authority on the similar ground as in the instant case. Shri
       Shashi Kant Sharma filed an appeal in CIC.



       3. In this matter, comments of CBI was sought as while forwarding its
       Report. CBI had mentioned that it may be treated as a "Confidential"

       document and no reference to it may be made, while pursuing the matter
       further or any other action initiated upon it. In case, any applicant seeks
       copy of the CBI Report or part thereof under 
RTI Act
, views of CBI should be
       ascertained as per 
Section 11
 of RTI Act, 2005 before deciding the matter. In
       view of this, CBI was requested to urgently convey CBI's objections/ no
       objections to the information being sought.



       4. CBI vide letter dated 21.03.2023 informed that further investigation with
       regard to money trail and other aspects is still continuing U/s 173(8) of
       
CrPC
 and efforts are being made to expedite the trial proceedings.
       Therefore. they have strong objection is sharing copy of CBI Report with
       accused Shri S.K. Sharma as the same may adversely affect the progress of
       ongoing further investigation & trial proceedings.



       5. The argument behind filing of the RITI application as mentioned by the
       applicant was to obtain rightful information and not to impede the process
       of investigation or any apprehension of prosecution is not tenable ipso facto
       as the CBI has informed that further investigation with regard to money trail
       and other aspects is still continuing U/s 173(8) of 
CrPC
 and efforts are
       being made to expedite the trial proceedings. Hence, the subject matter is
       yet to attain finality.



       6. Hon'ble Central Information Commission in case numbers
       CIC/AT/A/2007/00007,                  CIC/AT/A/2007/00010                     &
       CIC/AT/A/2007/00011 dated 10.07.2007 has, inter alia, held that "the
       term investigation used in 
Section 8(1)(h)
 in the context of this Act should be
       interpreted broadly and liberally. We cannot import into the RT1 Act the
       technical definition of investigation one finds in criminal law. Here
       investigation would mean all actions of law enforcement, disciplinary
       proceedings, enquiries, adjudications and so on. Logically, no investigation
       could be said to be complete unless it has reached a point where the final


                                                                            Page 4 of 16

        decision on the basis of the investigation is taken. In that sense, an
       investigation can be an extended investigation".



       7. Therefore, the information sought by the applicant stands exempted from
       disclosure at this juncture under 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. There
       is no inconsistency or mala fide intent on the part of the CPIO.



 
8. Further. it may be worthwhile to recall that in the case of 
Mardia
       Chemicals Ltd. vs Union of India
. the Hon'ble Supreme Court had observed
       that
            "66. Therefore. whenever public interest to such a large extent is
            involved and it may become necessary to achieve an object which
            serves the public purpose individual rights may have to give away.
            Public interest has always been considered to be above the private
            interest. Interest of an individual may, to some extent, be effected but
            it cannot have the potential of taking over the public interest having
            an impact in the socio-economic drive of the country...




       9. It is further submitted that requisite documents are not restricted to the
       applicant     i.e.  Shri   Thomas     Mathew only.         It   also   contains
       references/examination of the role of other persons involved in the matter.
       The roles of the respective officers cannot be read in isolation with that of
       the other accused officers in the matter. The accusations stem from a
       common offence committed by each of the officers in their own official
       capacity. In light of this, the possibility of these officers entering into any
       sort of pact with each other and raking up the matter at other fora with a
       view to opening new fronts against the Government of India and adding
       unwarranted dimensions to the ongoing investigation by the investigative
       agency cannot be ruled out.



The Appellant represented by Shri S A Kunte participated in the hearing through
video conference. Shri Kunte reiterated Appellant's written submission and stated
that the Attorney General's (AGs) opinion as sought in point 1 was not a part of
the charge sheet filed before the Court. On point 2 regarding the official
communications between two public authorities i.e., MoD and IAF in the years
2020, 2021 and 2022 with regards to the technical correctness of the TEC and
IAF opinion on granting Sanction for Prosecution he stated that the documentsare
not part of the investigation and do not find mention in the chargesheet nor have
they been placed in court. He also argued that unlike in the case of the other
accused, the charge sheet filed before the Court in reference to the Appellant does
not make any reference to investigating the money trail but revolves around
issues of procedural lapses. Shri Kunte added that the information should be
disclosed in the larger public interest as it will go a long way in aiding bonafide
decision making by the Armed forces personnel, future defence procurementand
most importantly the morale of the armed forces personnel.



The Respondent represented by Shri Bhupesh Pillai, US participated in the
hearing through video conference. He referred to his written submissions and
stated that a similar RTI was filed by Shri Shashi Kant Sharma, one of the co-
accused in the VVIP helicopter matter seeking copies of files of Department of


                                                                            Page 5 of 16

 Personnel and Training Office of the Chief Vigilance Commissioner which was
denied on similar grounds. In the matter of Shri Sharma consent of CBI was also
sought being the investigating agency which was denied by the CBI vide letter
dated 21.03.2023 on the ground that further investigation with regard to money
trail and other aspects is still continuing U/s 173(8) of 
CrPC
 and efforts are being
made to expedite the trial proceedings. Therefore. they have strong objection in
sharing a copy of CBI report with the accused Shri S.K. Sharma as the same may
adversely affect the progress of ongoing further investigation & trial proceedings.
Shri Pillai added that information sought was not restricted to the applicant i.e.
Shri Thomas Mathew. It also contains references/examination of the role of other
persons involved in the matter. The roles of the respective officers cannot be read
in isolation with that of the other accused officers in the matter. The accusations
stem from a common offence committed by each of the officers in their own official
capacity. In light of this, the possibility of these officers entering into any sort of
pact with each other and raking up the matter at other fora with a view to opening
new fronts against the Government of India and adding unwarranted dimensions
to the ongoing investigation by the investigative agency cannot be ruled out. On
being queried by the Commission as to how the CBI report prepared against a co-
accused is relevant in the present instance, the Respondent stated that there was
correspondence with the IAF on the basis of the CBI report which broadly pertains
to the same investigation.



Decision
Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by both the
parties the Commission pronounces its decision as under:



Point 1
In point 1 the Appellant is seeking opinions of the Attorney General of India (AGI)
on the Prosecution Sanction in respect of N Santosh, SA Kunte and Thomas
Mathew which cannot be provided as per 
Section 8 (1) (e)
 as there exists a
fiduciary relationship between the AGI and the Central Government. The legal
position on this issue has been settled by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in

Union of India vs Subhash Chandra Aggarwal
, LPA 168/2015 and 
Union of India
vs R K Jain LPA
 199/ 2015 decided on 03.02.2017, the relevant extracts of which
are as under:




"21. However, it cannot be ignored that the predominant function of the AGI
is to give advice upon legal matters, to appear in court as stated, i.e.
perform the duties akin to an Advocate/Senior Advocate. The acts which
have been noted by the learned Single Judge as not forming part of the
duties as an Advocate, namely, that the Supreme court may take action for
criminal contempt on a motion made by the AGI or that the AGI is an ex
officio member of the Bar Council of India represent a small proportion of
the duties of an AGI. Essentially, the function being that akin to
an Advocate of the Government of India, he is in a fiduciary relationship
with the Government of India and cannot put in the public domain his
opinions or the materials forwarded to him by the Government of India.



                                                                             Page 6 of 16


 22. Reference in this context may be had to 
Section 126
 of the Evidence Act which
reads as follows:- ―


       126. Professional communications.--No barrister, attorney, pleader or vakil
       shall at any time be permitted, unless with his client's express consent, to
       disclose any communication made to him in the course and for the purpose
       of his employment as such barrister, pleader, attorney or vakil, by or on
       behalf of his client, or to state the contents or condition of any document
       with which he has become acquainted in the course and for the purpose of
       his professional employment, or to disclose any advice given by him to his
       client in the course and for the purpose of such employment: Provided that
       nothing in this section shall protect from disclosure-- (1) Any such
       communication made in furtherance of any 1[illegal] purpose; 2[illegal]
       purpose;" (2) Any fact observed by any barrister, pleader, attorney or vakil,
       in the course of his employment as such, showing that any crime or fraud
       has been committed since the commencement of his employment. It is
       immaterial whether the attention of such barrister, 2[pleader], attorney or
       vakil was or was not directed to such fact by or on behalf of his client.
       Explanation.--The obligation stated in this section continues after the
       employment has ceased.‖


23. In a catena of judgments, the Supreme Court has reiterated that a lawyer acts
in a fiduciary capacity with his client. Reference may be to the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of 
Central Board of Secondary Education & Anr. vs.
Aditya Bandopadhyay &Ors.
, (2011) 8 SCC 497. That was a case where the
petitioner in the writ petition had made an application for inspection and re-
evaluation of the answer book. While dealing with the contention of the CBSE that
the examining body holds the evaluated answer books in a fiduciary relationship,
the Supreme Court held as follows:-




       41. In a philosophical and very wide sense, examining bodies can be said to
       act in a fiduciary capacity, with reference to students who participate in an
       examination, as a government does while governing its citizens or as the
       present generation does with reference to the future generation while
       preserving the environment. But the words 'information available to a
       person in his fiduciary relationship' are used in 
Section 8(1)(e)
 of RTI Act in
       its normal and well recognized sense, that is to refer to persons who act in a
       fiduciary capacity, with reference to a specific beneficiary or beneficiaries
       who are to be expected to be protected or benefited by the actions of the
       fiduciary - a trustee with reference to the beneficiary of the trust, a guardian
       with reference to a minor/physically/infirm/mentally challenged, a parent
       with reference to a child, a lawyer or a chartered accountant with reference
       to a client, a doctor or nurse with reference to a patient, an agent with
       reference to a principal, a partner with reference to another partner, a
       director of a company with reference to a share-holder, an executor with
       reference to a legatee, a receiver with reference to the parties to a lis, an
       employer with reference to the confidential information relating to the
       employee,      and     an    employee      with     reference     to    business
       dealings/transaction of the employer. We do not find that kind of fiduciary


                                                                            Page 7 of 16

       relationship between the examining body and the examinee, with reference
      to the evaluated answer-books, that come into the custody of the examining
      body.



24. Similarly in the case of 
Kokkanda B. Poondacha & Ors. vs. K.D.Ganapathi &
Anr.
, (2011) 12 SCC 600 the Supreme Court held as follows:-




      12. At this stage, we may also advert to the nature of relationship between
      a lawyer and his client, which is solely founded on trust and confidence. A
      lawyer cannot pass on the confidential information to anyone else. This is
      so because he is a fiduciary of his client, who reposes trust and confidence
      in the lawyer. Therefore, he has a duty to fulfil all his obligations towards
      his client with care and act in good faith. Since the client entrusts the whole
      obligation of handling legal proceedings to an advocate, he has to act
      according to the principles of uberrima fides, i.e., the utmost good faith,
      integrity, fairness and loyalty.



25. Reference may also be had to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case
of 
Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, West Bengal vs. Satyen
Bhowmick & Ors.
, AIR 1981 SCC 917. That was a case in which the accused
was charged under the 
Official Secrets Act
. The Magistrate directed the lawyer to
produce his notebook. The Magistrate permitted the defence lawyer to take copies
of the statement of the witness in order to be in a position to cross-examine the
witness. Subsequently, the Magistrate directed the lawyer to produce his
notebook to examine that only a summary of the evidence has been taken by the
lawyer not in extenso in violation of 
Section 14
. The lawyer claimed privilege
under 
Section 126
 of the Act. The Supreme Court held as follows:-




26. xxx xxx


      4. That there was absolutely no impropriety on the part of the Magistrate in
      not taking action against the defence lawyer for his refusal to' show his
      register because the lawyer had rightly claimed privilege under 
Section
      126
 of the Evidence Act as the register contained instructions given by the
      client which being privileged could not be disclosed to the Court. On a parity
      of reasoning we find no impropriety on the conduct of the lawyer in refusing
      to show the statement of witnesses recorded by the Court in extenso in
      order to prepare himself for an effective cross-examination of the witnesses.
      Hence the strictures passed by the High Court on the Magistrate as also on
      the lawyer of the defence were, in our opinion, totally unwarranted. xxx


26. Similarly, in a recent judgment in the case of 
Reserve Bank of India & Ors. vs.
Jayantilal N. Mistry & Ors.
, (2016) 3 SCC 525 the Supreme Court while dealing
with the defence of RBI that it was in the fiduciary relationship with the Bank
noted as follows:-




      55. The Advanced Law Lexicon, 3rd Edition, 2005, defines fiduciary
      relationship as "a relationship in which one person is under a duty to act for
      the benefit of the other on the matters within the scope of the fiduciary
      relationship. Fiduciary relationship usually arise in one of the four


                                                                           Page 8 of 16

       situations (1) when one person places trust in the faithful integrity of
      another, who as a result gains superiority or influence over the first, (2)
      when one person assumes control and responsibility over another, (3) when
      one person has a duty to act or give advice to another on matters falling
      within the scope of the relationship, or (4) when there is specific relationship
      that has traditionally be recognized as involving fiduciary duties, as with a
      lawyer and a client, or a stockbroker and a customer.



      xxx


 
57. The term fiduciary relationship has been well discussed by this Court in
      the case of 
Central Board of Secondary Education and Anr. v. Aditya
      Bandopadhyay and Ors.
 (supra). In 
the said decision
, their Lordships
      referred various authorities to ascertain the meaning of the term fiduciary
      relationship and observed thus:




            20.1) Black's Law Dictionary (7th Edition, Page 640) defines 'fiduciary
            relationship' thus: A relationship in which one person is under a duty
            to act for the benefit of the other on matters within the scope of the
            relationship. Fiduciary relationships-such as trustee- beneficiary,
            guardian-ward, agent-principal, and attorney- client-require the
            highest duty of care. Fiduciary relationships usually arise in one of
            four situations: (1) when one person places trust in the faithful
            integrity of another, who as a result gains superiority or influence
            over the first, (2) when one person assumes control and responsibility
            over another, (3) when one person has a duty to act for or give advice
            to another on matters falling within the scope of the relationship, or
            (4) when there is a specific relationship that has traditionally been
            recognized as involving fiduciary duties, as with a lawyer and a
            client or a stockbroker and a customer.‖


27. In this scenario, can the AGI be termed to be ―Public authority‖ as defined in
the RTI Act is the question that needs to be answered by us.



28. 
In 
Som Prakash Rekhi vs. Union of India & Anr.
, (1981) 1 SCC 449 the
Supreme Court in the context of determining as to whether the respondent therein
was a State as stated in 
Article 12
 of the Constitution held as follows:-




      27. Control by Government of the corporation is writ large in the Act and in
      the factum of being a government company. Moreover, here, 
Section 7
 gives
      to the government company mentioned in it a statutory recognition, a
      legislative section and a status above a mere government company. If the
      entity is no more than a company under the Company Law or society under
      the law relating to registered societies or co-operative societies you cannot
      call it an authority. A ration shop run by a cooperative store financed by
      Government is not an authority, being a mere merchant, not a sharer of
      State power. 'Authority' in law belongs to the province of power:



      ―Authority (in Administrative Law) is a body having jurisdiction in certain
      matters of a public nature. The Law Lexicon of British India, P. Ramanatha


                                                                           Page 9 of 16

       Aiyar, 1940 (P. 101). Therefore, the "ability conferred upon a person by the
      law to alter, by his own will directed to that end, the rights, duties,
      liabilities or other legal relations, either of himself or of other persons"
      Salmond, Jurisprudence, 10th Edn. p. 243 must be present ab extra to
      make a person an 'authority', when the person is an 'agent or instrument of
      the functions of the State' the power is public. So the search here must be to
      see whether the Act vests authority, as agent or instrument of the State, to
      affect the legal relations of oneself or others.



29. The essential services provided by the AGI are to advice the Government upon
legal matters and perform other duties such of a legal character as may be
assigned. AGI is not a functionary reposed with any administrative or other
authority which effect the rights or liabilities of persons. The objects of the 
RTI
Act
 have been noted by the Supreme Court in the case of 
Instituted of Chartered
Accountants of India vs. Shaunak H.Satya & Ors.
, (2011) 8 SCC 781 as under:-




      23. The information to which RTI Act applies falls into two categories,
      namely, (i) information which promotes transparency and accountability in
      the working of every public authority, disclosure of which helps in
      containing or discouraging corruption, enumerated in Clauses (b) and

      (c) of 
Section 4(1)
 of RTI Act; and (ii) other information held by public
      authorities not falling under 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and (c) of 
RTI Act
. In regard to
      information falling under the first category, the public authorities owe a duty
      to disseminate the information widely suo moto to the public so as to make
      it easily accessible to the public. In regard to information enumerated or
      required to be enumerated under 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and (c) of 
RTI Act
,
      necessarily and naturally, the competent authorities under the 
RTI Act
, will
      have to act in a pro-active manner so as to ensure accountability and
      ensure that the fight against corruption goes on relentlessly. But in regard to
      other information which do not fall under 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and (c) of the Act,
      there is a need to proceed with circumspection as it is necessary to find out
      whether they are exempted from disclosure.



      24. One of the objects of democracy is to bring about transparency of
      information to contain corruption and bring about accountability. But
      achieving this object does not mean that other equally important public
      interests including efficient functioning of the governments and public
      authorities, optimum use of limited fiscal resources, preservation of
      confidentiality of sensitive information, etc. are to be ignored or sacrificed.

      The object of 
RTI Act
 is to harmonize the conflicting public interests, that is,
      ensuring transparency to bring in accountability and containing corruption
      on the one hand, and at the same time ensure that the revelation of
      information, in actual practice, does not harm or adversely affect other
      public interests which include efficient functioning of the governments,
      optimum use of limited fiscal resources and preservation of confidentiality of
      sensitive information, on the other hand. While 
Sections 3
 and 
4
 seek to
      achieve the first objective, 
Sections 8
, 
9
, 
10
 and 
11
 seek to achieve the
      second objective.



                                                                          Page 10 of 16


  30. Looking at the object of the Act, it appears to us that it would not
 have envisaged encompassing an office like that of an AGI to be covered
 under 
Section 2(h)
 of the RTI Act.



  31. For the aforesaid reasons, we are unable to agree with the conclusion
 of the learned Single Judge that the office of AGI falls within the
 description               of             ―public               authority."



Point 2
In point 2 the Appellant is seeking the official responses of the Indian Air Force
from 2020 till date to the Ministry of Defence (Vigilance) with regards to the
prosecution sanction of the Appellant and other accused. Therefore, it is clear
that the documents sought by the Appellant pertain to his prosecution sanction.A
plethora of judgements of higher courts deal with the question of disclosure of
documents related to prosecution sanction. However, before deciding on the issue
of disclosure of information, the complexities involved in such corruption trials
and how disclosure of information may dilute the proceedings has to be
understood. The Hon'ble High Court of Madras in a recent judgement in
Gulab Singh Ranavs CPIO, Indian Overseas Bank, WP No 37231/ 2016
decided on 08.12.2021 has elaborately dealt with the issue. The following
observations are particularly relevant to the instant matter:



 "38. The petitioner requested for a copy of request letter received from CBI for
 seeking sanction, copy of internal office memorandum containing the
 opinion/views of Disciplinary Authority for giving sanction for prosecution, copy of
 first advice given by CVC, New Delhi, the outcome of the reconciliatory meeting
 between Disciplinary Authority and CBI office of the New Delhi, the copy of any
 further clarification sought for by the CVC, the copy of internal office memorandum
 containing the opinion/views of Disciplinary Authority for giving sanction for
 prosecution, the copy of latest correspondence from CVC requesting/advising the
 Bank, the copy of internal office memorandum containing the opinion/views of the
 present Disciplinary Authority and finally copy of draft sanction supplied by CBI.



 39. Considering the nature of questions sought for, interestingly, the first
 information is the request letter received from the CBI for seeking sanctioning. The
 said    letter   may      have     certain    informations    pertaining    to   the
 investigation/interrogation. The second document is copy of internal office
 memorandum containing the opinion/views of the Disciplinary Authority.



 40 .This Court is of the considered opinion that note file, opinions, views of the
 Disciplinary Authority may vary from time to time based on the informations and
 based on the collection of facts and evidences. Even at later point of time, initial
 opinion may not be final opinion in many cases. Subsequent facts may provide a
 different views and opinion and therefore, if the copy of the opinion and views are
 supplied, it will create unnecessary hindrance for the peaceful investigation,
 interrogation and to proceed with the departmental disciplinary proceedings as
 well as the criminal proceedings. For example, on receipt of the preliminary report,
 the Disciplinary Authority would have formed certain opinions or expressed some


                                                                          Page 11 of 16

 views. However, those opinions and views cannot be construed as final, as far as
the decisions to be taken. During subsequent period, if further documents are
made available or certain other facts are placed, then the Disciplinary Authority
may change his opinion or views. This is exactly the reason why, in disciplinary
case, the rule contemplates opportunities to the delinquent officials. Therefore, the
internal office memorandum containing opinion/views if supplied, undoubtedly,
would create unnecessary issues as the petitioner will certainly rely on the
document for the purpose of destroying the case. However, any
accused/delinquent officials is entitled to defend his case in the manner known to
law.



41. Thus, furnishing of such opinions and views of the Disciplinary Authority at
various stages, if provided under the 
RTI Act
, then it will hamper the continuation
of the disciplinary proceedings and further, disrupt the investigation to be
conducted by the investigating agency.



42. Perusal of other documents and informations sought for by the petitioner are
all relatable to the reconciliatory meeting between the officials. Clarifications
sought for by the CVC, latest correspondence etc., of such informations and
documents sought for reveals that it is between the authorities and more so,
relating to views/opinions, internal correspondences etc.,


43. No doubt, all such correspondences are protected under 
Section 8
 of the RTI
Act. However, it is the "subjective satisfaction" of the authorities. The "subjective
satisfaction" must be considered by the Public Information Officer, while complying
with the request of the information seekers. This exactly is the purpose and object
of 8(h) of the Act.



"
Section 8(h)
 contemplates of information which would impede the process of
investigation or apprehension or prosecution of offenders."



44. Where the circumstances narrated under 
Section 8(h)
 on that informations,
which would impede the process of investigation or apprehension or prosecution of
offenders. Thus, if the information provided, would cause any hindrance to the
investigation or apprehension or prosecution of offenders. The language employed
is "Apprehension". Thus, "Apprehension" of the competent authority is also
considered in the legislation. The word "Apprehension", no doubt, can be
interpreted widely and further, it provides discretion to the authorities for forming
an opinion, whether there is an "Apprehension" or not. In this regard, the
subjective satisfaction of the competent authority is of paramount importance. The
Public Information Officer is expected to consider in the event of furnishing such
informations, which all are connected with the investigation or prosecution of
offenders and providing of such informations, would impede the process, then, he
is empowered to exercise power of discretion and reject the application of the
information seeker. Thus, the scope of 
section 8(h)
 is to be understood, with
reference to the context and to the subjective satisfaction of the authorities
competent. If the competent authority satisfied that there is a likelihood of impede
the process of investigation or prosecution of offenders, then such informations or
documents shall be denied.



                                                                          Page 12 of 16


 45. The purpose and object of the exemption clause is to ensure that the
administrative confidentiality are protected and because of providing of
information, the further continuation of investigation or prosecution cannot be
impeded. This being the scope of exemption under 
Section 8(h)
, the questions
sought for by the petitioner in the present case with reference to 8(h) is to be
considered.



46. As discussed in the aforementioned paragraphs, the questions and documents
sought for by the petitioner in the present case is relatable to internal office
memorandum containing opinions/views of reconciliatory meeting between the
Disciplinary Authority and CBI clarification sought for by CVC internal office
memorandum containing opinions/views latest correspondences from CVC etc.,


47. This Court is of the considered opinion that such informations, if provided, it
will create unnecessary hampering of the Disciplinary Proceedings or the
prosecution. Even an apprehension in this regard is sufficient is to deny
information to the applicants. The word "Apprehension" is employed in the Act, so
as to protect the prosecution and process of investigation, which should not be
paralyzed at any circumstances in the public interest. When the investigation is
undertaken, then the authorities must be provided with an amount of discretion
for the purpose of culling out the truth in respect of the allegations. Thus, any
hindrance in between, would undoubtedly paralyze the investigation process,
which would dilute the prosecution and would extend unlawful benefit to the
accused persons.



48. The opinions and views formed by the competent authorities on every stage
may vary or change depending on the progress made in the investigation and
based on the further facts culled out from and out of the evidences. During the
course of such investigation or prosecution, if informations are provided regarding
the opinions already formed, then undoubtedly the same will hamper further
investigation and disrupt the prosecution to be conducted by the agency. If such
nature of informations or documents are provided, then it may not be possible to
proceed with the prosecution for the purpose of establishing the offence.



49. In this context, the rights of both the parties should be considered by the
Courts. It is not only the right of the information seekers, but the right of the
information provider must also considered by this Court. Whenever a statutory
right is conferred to the citizen, equally such right is conferred to the other citizen,
whose interest is also to be protected before allowing a person to exercise such a
statutory right. To elaborate, right and duties are corresponding terms, so also,
rights can be exercised by any citizen, honoring the corresponding rights of the
other citizen. It is exactly the constitutional perspective and the philosophy. Take a
case, where informations or documents are mechanically provided to the
information seekers in all circumstances, then the right and duties of the
investigating agency and the prosecutors are denied, establishing their cases
before the competent Court of law or before the Disciplinary Authority. Thus, a
balancing approach is required, while implementing the provisions of the 
RTI Act
.
It is not as if, an information seeker is entitled to get all informations and
documents including certain internal correspondences and views or opinions
recorded by the competent authorities then and there and time to time. Therefore,


                                                                            Page 13 of 16

   practical and pragmatic approach coupled with rules of constructive interpretation
  is of paramount importance to take a decision in such circumstances. In the event
  of committing any lapses, the same would provide unlawful gain to the
  accused/delinquent persons, which would result in destruction of the prosecution
  or the case of the Disciplinary Authority and larger the public interest involved in
  the matter of criminal prosecution is also to be considered by the Court. State
  being the prosecutors, right of investigation, collected evidence, record the opinions
  and views in those files must be protected in all circumstances and by obtaining
  all such informations and documents from the competent authorities, the accused
  may not be allowed to destroy the basis of prosecution as such views/opinions or
  internal correspondence can never be construedas final opinion/views or the final
  decision.



  50 .Considering the fact that the Central Information Commission elaborately
  considered the grounds raised by the petitioner in the order passed in the Second
  Appeal, arrived a conclusion that the exemption granted to CBI from applicability
  of the 
RTI Act
, in terms of 
Section 24(1)
 would became meaningless. If RTI
  applicants would get information from another Public Authority, the very
  information that they cannot get from the CBI or information, inexplicably linked to
  the information and materials provided by the CBI to the Public Authority.



  51. The above findings of the Central Information Commission explicitly clarifies
  that what an information seeker could not able to get from the CBI, cannot attempt
  to get from his employer or from other agencies. Such calculated applications filed
  under the 
RTI Act
, at no circumstances, are entertainable. In the present case, the
  informations and documents sought for are no doubt relating to the files being
  maintained by the CBI and about the investigation of the Criminal case, so also
  pertaining to the sanction, which all are relatable to investigation/interrogation or
  prosecution. Thus, the first proviso to 
Section 24(1)
 cannot be extended merely
  under the ground that the word 'Corruption' is employed in the Statute.



  52. Distinctions are to be drawn in this regard and 
Section 24(1)
 proviso must be
  read and understood along with the spirit of 
Section 8(h)
 of the Right to
  Information Act. Rule of constructive interpretation in such circumstances are
  imminent to ensure that the purpose and object of the 
RTI Act
 is not defeated. So
  also at the time of providing informations or documents, the rights of other parties
  and the criminal laws system of prosecution by the State is not affected or
  destroyed on account of providing such confidential informations to the
  information seekers.



  53. In view of the principles considered by this Court in the
  aforementionedparagraphs, this Court is able to form a concrete opinion that the
  informations anddocuments sought for by the petitioner are rightly rejected by the
  Public InformationOfficer, Indian Overseas Bank, First Appellate Authority and
  finally by the Central Information Commission/Second Appellate Authority."



Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in 
Union of India vs. Shiv
Narain, WP(C
) 7204/2016 dated 27.03.2019 which pertains to similar facts
and circumstances advised the information seeker to obtain the information



                                                                            Page 14 of 16

 from the concerned trial court where the matter was pending. The relevant
observations are hereunder:




 
"2. The respondent herein sought information from the petitioner on the
       following two issues:- "1. Whether the report vide letter no. RSVY/CE/CE &
       PM/55(1) 892 dated 12.02.2013 addressed to Inspector of police, CBI, ACB,
       Patna by Shri D.S. Kapur CE cum PM RSVY project Zone, CPWD, Patna in
       connection with the subject 
referred above
 was submitted by the CBI before
       the sanctioning Authority before grant of prosecution sanction. 2. The
       certified copy of the note sheet of the above mentioned case from the
       beginning to the issue of prosecution sanction may also be given for which I
       am ready to pay the requisite fee."




       4. Learned counsel for the respondent has fairly drawn my attention to an
       order dated February 12, 2019 passed by the Supreme Court in Civil
       Appeal No. 1632/2019, which is an appeal arising from the orders passed
       by the Coordinate Bench of this Court in W.P.(C) 2272/2013 dated
       September 16, 2014 and the Division Bench in LPA 471/2015 dated August
       17, 2015, wherein information also includes copy of the note sheet for
       processing the decision to refer the said case to Anti Corruption Branch of
       CBI for investigation. In the said case, the said information was denied to
       the petitioner Ashok Kumar Sharma.



       5. The Supreme Court in its order dated February 12, 2019 has held as
       under:-



             4. The dispute remains about document Nos.1, 3 and 4 as they
             were not supplied considering the provisions of 
Section 8(i)(h)

             of the Right to Information Act which prohibits disclosure of
             information connected with ongoing investigations and
             prosecutions and it was opined that it was source information
             that has triggered the anti-corruption proceedings and
             nothing should be done which affects the proceedings or which
             compromises the position of the sources of information. 5. In
             view of the aforesaid reasons employed by the Information
             Commissioner, we are of the opinion that there was
             justification in refusing to supply the aforesaid documents.

             However, as rightly pointed out by learned counsel for the
             appellant that during the course of trial, if the trial Court
             feels it appropriate and if a prayer is made, the documents
             may be called by Court in accordance with law.



       6. The learned counsel for the respondent submits that the respondent
       herein shall have the liberty to seek the document, which he has sought
       under the 
RTI Act
 from the learned Trial Court, in terms of the order of the




                                                                        Page 15 of 16

        Supreme Court. Suffice it would be to state that it is for the respondent
       herein to seek appropriate orders from the learned Trial Court.



       In view of the order of the Supreme Court, the order of the CIC dated
       February 29, 2016 is set aside, the writ petition is allowed."



 In the light of the above observations, the Commission finds no reason to further
 intervene in the matter and advises the Appellant to approach an appropriate
 forum for redressal of his grievance.



 The instant Second Appeal stands disposed off accordingly.





                                                                        वाई. के . िस हा)
                                                         Y. K. Sinha (वाई.        िस हा
                                    Chief Information Commissioner (मु य सूचना आयु!)

Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)

S. K. Chitkara (एस. के . िचटकारा)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26186535





                                                                            Page 16 of 16