[Cites 
21
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Ashish Mahajan (Indusind Bank) vs Reserve Bank Of India on 13 May, 2022


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                             के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                      Central Information Commission
                          बाबा गंगनाथ माग ,मुिनरका
                       Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                       नई  द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या/Second Appeal No. CIC/RBIND/A/2019/141892

Mr. Ashish Mahajan                                       ... अपीलकता /Appellant
(IndusInd Bank Limited)
                                   VERSUS
                                    बनाम
CPIO                                                      ...!ितवादी/Respondent
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Banking Supervision,
Central Office, 2nd Floor, Centre-1,
Cuffe Parade, Colaba, Mumbai-400005

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:-

RTI : 26-10-2018            FA    : 01-03-2019           SA       : 30-08-2019

CPIO : Not on Record        FAO : 10-07-2019             Hearing : 22-04-2022

                                  ORDER

1.    The original RTI applicant Shri L.N. Gulati filed an application under the

Right to Information Act, 2005
 
(RTI Act
) before the Central Public Information
Officer (CPIO), Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai. The appellant seeking
information on fifteen points including inter-alia is as under:-



                                                                      Page 1 of 11


 2.     No reply of CPIO is placed on record. Further, the CPIO had issued a
notice under 
Section 11(1)
 read with 
Section 11(2)
 under 
RTI Act, 2005
 to the
appellant i.e. Induslnd Bank Limited, concerning query at Point No. 2 of the
RTI application, wherein Shri Gulati had requested the CPIO to inform him "the
details of penalties imposed on Induslnd Bank Limited for last three years and
supply copies of RBI orders'. After considering the response from Induslnd
Bank Limited, the CPIO decided to disclose the information after severing the
information under 
Section 10(1)
 which was considered exempt from disclosure
under 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act, 2005. Induslnd Bank Limited was informed of
the said decision vide letter dated February 04, 2019 issued under 
Section 11(3)

of the RTI Act, 2005. Being dissatisfied with the same, the appellant has file
first appeal dated 01-03-2019 and requested that the information should not be
disclosed to the original RTI applicant. The FAO vide letter dated 10-07-2019
upheld CPIOs reply and dismissed the appeal. He has filed a second appeal
before the Commission on the ground that the order of the FAA should be set-
aside.



Hearing:



3.    The appellant was personally present in the hearing and was represented
through counsel Shri V.K. Gupta. The respondent, Shri Abhay Kumar, General
Manager & CPIO along with Ms. Rose Saprocho, Assistant Legal Advisor
attended the hearing through video-conferencing. The original RTI applicant
Shri L N Gulati was not present despite notice.

4.    The written submissions of the parties are taken on record.

5.    The counsel for the Indusind Bank Ltd. submitted that the CPIO has
passed the non-speaking order as the CPIO had not given any reason to arrive at
his decision to disclose the information, no finding is given on various issues
raised by the appellant. He stated that the FAA should have considered and
applied the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 more particularly provisions granting
exemption from disclosure and provisions prohibiting disclosure of certain
information, while deciding the appeal of the appellant. Simply because the
information which the RBI generates or is available in possession with RBI, it
cannot be disclosed or given to the public without any further inquiry and
examination/scrutiny under provisions of the Act. He stated that the FAA
having dismissed the appeal of the appellant by applying the judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in 
Reserve Bank of India & Ors. Vs. Jayantilal
Mistry & Ors
 had violated the principles of natural justice in as much as the
appellate authority did not grant any opportunity to the appellant to submit its

                                                                      Page 2 of 11

 response to the applicability of said judgment. The information sought by the
applicant is exempted from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(d)
, 
8(1)(j)
 of the RTI
Act.


6.     The respondent, CPIO, Reserve Bank of India submitted that vide letter
dated 22.01.2019, they have issued a notice under 
Section 11(1)
 of the RTI Act,
2005 to Indusind Bank Ltd. After considering the response/written submission
from Indusind Bank, the CPIO, vide letter dated 04.02.2019 has issued a notice
under 
Section 11(3)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 informing the appellant the decision
to disclose the information after severing the information exempt from
disclosure under 
Section 10(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. The respondent further
submitted that aggrieved by the letter/notice dated 04.02.2019 issued by the
Reserve Bank/CPIO in exercise of the powers conferred by 
Section 11(3)
, the
appellant preferred an appeal under 
section 19
 of the RTI Act before the First
Appellate Authority (FAA). In the appeal, the appellant stated that Indusind
Bank is not a public authority as per 
RTI Act, 2005
. The appellant has also
contended that the order dated 19.07.2016 passed by RBI imposing penalty on
them is of confidential nature and disclosure of the same may harm their
competitive position. The FAA had also upheld the reply given by the CPIO.
The following observation of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Reserve Bank of
India & Ors. v. Jayantilal N. Mistry & Ors.
, (2016) 3 SCC 525 is pertinent in
this regard "RBI is supposed to uphold public interest and not the interest of
individual banks. RBI is clearly not in any fiduciary relationship with any bank.
RBI has no legal duty to maximize the benefit of any public sector or private
sector bank, and thus there is no relationship of 'trust' between them. RBI has a
statutory duty to uphold the interest of the public at large".




Decision:

7.     The Commission, after hearing the submissions of all the parties and after
perusal of records, observes that the RTI applicant Shri L N Gulati had sought
information regarding "Please provide the details of main promoters of
Induslnd Bank Ltd. i.e. their name, position, shareholding, change in
shareholding since date of licensing, details of their shareholding; Please
inform the details of penalties imposed on Induslnd Bank Ltd. for last three
years and supply copies of RBI orders; Please provide details violation of
Prevention of Money Laundry Act by Induslnd Bank as observed by RBI during
its inspection / reported to RBI by the bank. The action taken against the bank
by RBI in each instance of 
PML Act
 violation, etc." The CPIO, Reserve Bank of
India had issued notice under 
Section 11(1)
 and 
11(3)
 to the bank only in
respect to point no. 2 of the RTI application mentioned above intending to

                                                                       Page 3 of 11

 disclose the information. Aggrieved by the decision of the CPIO, the said bank
had filed first appeal with the First Appellate Authority. But the FAA had also
dismissed the first appeal of the bank summarily. Being aggrieved with the
order of the FAA, bank had filed second appeal before this Commission.

8.     The Commission further observes that some queries of the RTI applicant
are in the nature of seeking explanation/opinion/advice from the CPIO viz.
'Please inform has Induslnd Bank have a Succession planning/succession Plan
for the post of MD & CEO. Has the same been submitted/reported to RBI and
when? lf yes provide the details of Succession Plan; Please inform instances of
promoter being appointed as the non-executive Chairman of private banks, etc.'
and he has expected that the CPIO firstly should analyze the documents and
then provide information to the RTI applicant. But the CPIO is not supposed to
create information; or to interpret information; or to furnish clarification to the
applicant under the ambit of the 
RTI Act
. As per 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act,
the reasons/opinions/advices can only be provided to the applicants if it is
available on record of the public authority. The CPIO cannot create information
in the manner as sought by the applicant. The CPIO is only a communicator of
information based on the records held in the office and hence, he cannot
expected to do research work to deduce anything from the material therein and
then supply it to him.

9.     The Commission takes note of the submissions made by the Bank that
large amount of data relating to its clients including their identity, penalties
imposed on them, business plans, decisions and financial transactions as well as
institutional business plans etc. of bank is shared with the regulator, without any
redaction or withholding the information, in good faith that these will be
objectively analysed in discharge of their statutory obligations to make fair
judgment on their functioning without affecting their competitive position. To
this extent, there is an element of trust and confidence in sharing the data, both
financial and operational, between the RBI and the bank. The information and
data of the clients in the hands of Bank also has the element of trust and
confidence that such data will not be disclosed or shared against their right to
privacy/commercial interest.

10. The Commission further takes note of the FAA's order referring to the

Jayantilal Mistry
's case upholding the decision of CPIO. The ratio of 
the said
judgment
 is that annual inspection report/audit reports of bank generated in the
hands of Reserve Bank of India as regulator does not enjoy protection under

Section 8(1)(e)
 of the RTI Act and the relationship between RBI and financial
institutions to that extent cannot be termed as 'fiduciary'. For various issues
involving right to privacy or protection of commercial interests Hon'ble

                                                                        Page 4 of 11

 Supreme Court and High Courts have passed orders amply clarifying disclosure
of such matters under the provisions of 
RTI Act
 and exemption under 
Section
8(1)
 of the Act.


11. Keeping in view the broader nature of business carried out between a
customer and the bank, the Commission takes note of the observations passed
by the Supreme Court in 
Central Board Of Sec. Education & Anr. vs Aditya
Bandopadhyay & Ors
 [2011 (8) SCC 497] vide order dated 09.08.2011
examined and explained the expression 'fiduciary relationship', and have
illustrated a few relationships where parties were involved in an act of fiduciary
capacity including 'customers' in the following words:


        "20. The term `fiduciary' and `fiduciary relationship' refer to different
        capacities and relationship, involving a common duty or obligation. 20.1)
        Black's Law Dictionary (7th Edition, Page 640) defines `fiduciary
        relationship' thus:



      A relationship in which one person is under a duty to act for the benefit of
      the other on matters within the scope of the relationship. Fiduciary
      relationships - such as trustee-beneficiary, guardian-ward, agent-
      principal, and attorney-client - require the highest duty of care. Fiduciary
      relationships usually arise in one of four situations : (1) when one person
      places trust in the faithful integrity of another, who as a result gains
      superiority or influence over the first, (2) when one person assumes
      control and responsibility over another, (3) when one person has a duty
      to act for or give advice to another on matters falling within the scope of
      the relationship, or (4) when there is a specific relationship that has
      traditionally been recognized as involving fiduciary duties, as with a
      lawyer and a client or a stockbroker and a customer."



      "39. The term "fiduciary" refers to a person having a duty to act for the
      benefit of another, showing good faith and candour, where such other
      person reposes trust and special confidence in the person owing or
      discharging the duty. The term "fiduciary relationship" is used to
      describe a situation or transaction where one person (beneficiary) places
      complete confidence in another person (fiduciary) in regard to his affairs,
      business or transaction(s). The term also refers to a person who holds a
      thing in trust for another (beneficiary). The fiduciary is expected to act in
      confidence and for the benefit and advantage of the beneficiary, and use
      good faith and fairness in dealing with the beneficiary or the things
      belonging to the beneficiary. If the beneficiary has entrusted anything to
      the fiduciary, to hold the thing in trust or to execute certain acts in regard

                                                                         Page 5 of 11

       to or with reference to the entrusted thing, the fiduciary has to act in
      confidence and is expected not to disclose the thing or information to any
      third party."



While taking into consideration the fact that the customers give their financial
information to the banks in confidence and with complete faith that may not be
divulged as a result of disclosure by others, the following observations passed
by the Supreme in Court 
Bihar Public Service Commission v. Saiyed Hussain
Abbas Rizwi and Anr.
 [ (2012) 13 SCC 61] may be relied upon:




      "The satisfaction has to be arrived at by the authorities objectively and
      the "consequences of such disclosure have to be weighed with regard to
      the circumstances of a given case. The decision has to be based on
      objective satisfaction recorded for ensuring that larger public interest
      outweighs unwarranted invasion of privacy or other factors stated in the
      provision. Certain matters, particularly in relation to appointment, are
      required to be dealt with great confidentiality. The information may come
      to knowledge of the authority as a result of disclosure by others who give
      that information in confidence and with complete faith, integrity and
      fidelity. Secrecy of such information shall be maintained, thus, bringing it
      within the ambit of fiduciary capacity. Similarly, there may be cases
      where the disclosure has no relationship to any public activity or interest
      or it may even cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of the individual.
      All these protections have to be given their due implementation as they
      spring from statutory exemptions. It is not a decision simpliciter between
      private interest and public interest. It is a matter where a constitutional
      protection is available to a person with regard to the right to privacy.
      Thus, the public interest has to be construed while keeping in mind the
      balance factor between right to privacy and right to information with the
      purpose sought to be achieved and the purpose that would be served in
      the larger public interest, particularly when both these rights emerge
      from the constitutional values under the Constitution of India."

Further, in 
Naresh Trehan vs Rakesh Kumar Gupta [W.P.(C
) 85/2010 & CM
Nos.156/2010 & 5560/2011], the Delhi High Court made the following
observations:




      "...It is, thus, essential that information relating to business affairs,
      which is considered to be confidential by an assessee must remain so,
      unless it is necessary in larger public interest to disclose the same. If the
      nature of information is such that disclosure of which may have the

                                                                        Page 6 of 11

      propensity of harming one's competitive interests, it would not be
     necessary to specifically show as to how disclosure of such information
     would, in fact, harm the competitive interest of a third party. In order to
     test the applicability of 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the Act it is necessary to first
     and foremost determine the nature of information and if the nature of
     information is confidential information relating to the affairs of a private
     entity that is not obliged to be placed in public domain, then it is
     necessary to consider whether its disclosure can possibly have an adverse
     effect on third parties."



 
The Supreme Court while deciding upon issues relating to personal
information of an individual in terms of his income tax returns passed the
following observations in 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande v. Central
Information Commr.
 [(2013) 1 SCC 212] :




     "12. The petitioner herein sought for copies of all memos, show-cause
     notices and censure/punishment awarded to the third respondent from his
     employer and also details viz. movable and immovable properties and
     also the details of his investments, lending and borrowing from banks and
     other financial institutions. Further, he has also sought for the details of
     gifts stated to have been accepted by the third respondent, his family
     members and friends and relatives at the marriage of his son. The
     information mostly sought for finds a place in the income tax returns of
     the third respondent. The question that has come up for consideration is:

     whether the abovementioned information sought for qualifies to be
     "personal information" as defined in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI
     Act.



     13. We are in agreement with the CIC and the courts below that the
     details called for by the petitioner i.e. copies of all memos issued to
     the third respondent, show cause notices and orders of
     censure/punishment etc. are qualified to be personal information as
     defined in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act. The performance
     of an employee/officer in an organization is primarily a matter
     between the employee and the employer and normally those aspects
     are governed by the service rules which fall under the expression
     "personal information", the disclosure of which has no relationship
     to any public activity or public interest. On the other hand, the
     disclosure of which would cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of
     that individual. Of course, in a given case, if the Central Public
     Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer of the
     Appellate Authority is satisfied that the larger public interest

                                                                       Page 7 of 11

        justifies the disclosure of such information, appropriate orders
       could be passed but the petitioner cannot claim those details as a
       matter of right.

       14. The details disclosed by a person in his income tax returns are
       "personal information" which stand exempted from disclosure under
       clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, unless involves a larger
       public interest and the Central Public Information Officer or the
       State Public Information Officer or the Appellate Authority is
       satisfied that the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of
       such information."

       The aforementioned observations make it clear that the data has been
shared by the individuals with the Income Tax Department which is seeking
such information as an statutory authority but while analyzing and assessing
their income keeps this data secure in the fiduciary capacity and hence it is
protected from disclosure. It is applicable not only for individuals but for other
legal entities recognizable under 
Income Tax Act
. Further, it has been observed
that the information in the hands of public authority even in the discharge of
statutory obligations is protected under fiduciary relationship.

12. There are apparently two set of such information which have been shared
by the bank with the regulator under statutory obligation. First is the
information/data of clients relating to their business/commercial operations,
financial transactions, business and commercial strategy which is shared by
clients with financial institutions in full trust and confidence and is held by them
in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure under the 
RTI Act
 in their
hands. Second set is the information relating to business strategy, decisions,
transactions, other operational data etc. of financial institution which may have
bearing on their competitive position and also enjoys the exemption from
disclosure in their hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise, under the 
RTI
Act
. The Commission is of the view that the exemption of disclosure of certain
information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of financial
institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in good
faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligations. This aspect is not
the ratio of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's judgment and
decision of the regulator to consider redacting such data/information while
disclosing the reports is to be aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts covering such aspects.

13. The Commission has also taken a detailed view in file nos.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 & Ors. dated 05.05.2022 wherein issues of
redaction, ratio of 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case and other related issues are discussed
in detail. Perusal of the relevant paragraphs in Jayantilal Mistry judgment make


                                                                         Page 8 of 11

 it clear that the fundamental rights enshrined upon the citizens in form of right
to information are not absolute and that the right to information may not draw
precedence over right to privacy. Therefore, the Courts need to strike a balance
between the rights as well as protections guaranteed to a citizen under 
Article 19

of the Constitution. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held that the disclosure
of information relating to banks and financial institutions may be allowed taking
into account the circumstances and nature of information sought for and not in a
blanket manner. The Commission advised the CPIO to consider taking the
relevant references from the said order while deciding the cases.


14. The Commission further observes that the CPIO while issuing notice
under 
Section 11
 of the RTI Act has given the opportunity to the bank to seek
their objections, if any, against disclosure of information w.r.t point no. 2 of the
RTI application but has not found it necessary to give them an opportunity of
hearing. The CPIO has not passed any reasoned order covering his deliberation
on their objections, his understanding of law or jurisprudence in rejecting
specific objections in favor of disclosure or redaction etc. Orders passed by the
CPIO is cryptic and without any reference to objections raised by the Bank.
Similarly, the FAA instead of passing a speaking order have given a cryptic and
vague reply to the appellant bank. The CPIO and the FAA have visibly not
applied their mind before issuing the order of intent of disclosing the
information. The conduct of the CPIO and FAA is not in line with the
provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and principles of natural justice. Further, no
opportunity of hearing was given to the appellant bank in order to enable them
to make their submissions nor speaking order have been passed by FAA for not
giving such opportunity of hearing or elaborating reasons for accepting /not
accepting their objections. The Commission is of the view that objections
should be specifically dealt and rejected/accepted with reasons. Further, the
order of CPIO and FAA have been passed without any opportunity of hearing to
the appellant but the orders so passed do not reflect deliberation and
understanding of points raised by the appellant not requiring any personal
hearing. There is nothing on record which shows that the CPIO has given point-
wise reply to the original RTI applicant on his RTI application beside point no.

2.

15. The Commission is of the view that opportunity of hearing should
necessarily be provided and orders passed by the CPIO and the FAA should be
reasoned, speaking and clear. In view of the above, the Commission directs the
CPIO, Reserve Bank of India to re-examine the RTI application of the original
RTI applicant in the light of the observations of the Commission afresh. The
Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various objections

                                                                         Page 9 of 11

 filed by the Bank and submissions made by applicant to reach the decision in
favour or against redaction of various parts of the information sought. He has to
factor the observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case and
other relevant judgments, some of which have been referred in this order as
well. Hence, with these observations the orders passed by the CPIO and FAA in
these matters are set aside and the case is being remanded to the CPIO for
adjudication afresh. The above directions of the Commission should be
complied within a period of 30 days from the date of receipt of this order. In
case, the appellant/applicant is aggrieved with the order of the CPIO, they are at
the liberty to file first appeal before the First Appellate Authority and afterwards
second appeal before the Commission.


16. With the above observations, the appeal is disposed of.

17. Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.




                                                            नीरज कु मार गु ा)
                                        Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरज           ा
                                                                सूचना आयु )
                                      Information Commissioner (सू

                                                          दनांक / Date : 12.05.2022
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत ित)


S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा ),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),
(011-26105682)





                                                                        Page 10 of 11

 Addresses of the parties:
1.   CPIO
     Reserve Bank of India
     Department of Banking Supervision,
     Central Office, 2nd Floor, Centre-1,
     Cuffe Parade, Colaba, Mumbai-400005

2.   Mr. Ashish Mahajan
     Dy. Vice President
     C/o. Indusind Bank Limited


3.   Mr. L. N. Gulati (Original Appellant)





                                             Page 11 of 11