[Cites 
4
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Abhijit Bhawal vs Ministry Of Environment & Forests on 22 July, 2020


Author: 
Vanaja N Sarna


Bench: 
Vanaja N Sarna


                            क य सच  ु ना आयोग
                    CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
                             बाबा गंगनाथ माग
                            Baba Gangnath Marg
                        मु नरका, नई द ल - 110067
                        Munirka, New Delhi-110067

                                           File no.: CIC/MOENF/A/2019/157622

In the matter of:
Abhijit Bhawal
                                                               ... Appellant
                                             VS
CPIO / Under Secretary,
Ministry of Environment , Forest & Climate Change(MoEF&CC),
FE Division, Indira Paryavaran Bhawan, 6th Floor,
Jal Wing, Aligang, Jorbag Road,
New Delhi-110003
                                                          ...Respondent


RTI application filed on          :   18/09/2019
CPIO replied on                   :   21/10/2019
First appeal filed on             :   24/10/2019
First Appellate Authority order   :   15/11/2019
Second Appeal dated               :   28/11/2019
Date of Hearing                   :   21/07/2020
Date of Decision                  :   21/07/2020

The following were present:
Appellant: Present over phone

Respondent: Mr. Mahender Yadav, CPIO, FE Div; present over phone

Information Sought:

The appellant has sought information with reference to the FE Division's order
No. 4-3/2013-FE dated 16th September, 2019 through which the appellant has
been placed under suspension.

      - Provide copy of all the noting pages of the file from which the
         suspension order of the appellant has been issued.



                                       1


 Grounds for Second Appeal
The CPIO has denied the information under 
section 8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act.



Submissions made by Appellant and Respondent during Hearing:



The appellant submitted that the denial of information
 u/s 8(1)(h)
 of the RTI
Act was not proper.



The CPIO explained that the inquiry is incomplete and the disclosure of
information may impede the disciplinary proceeding. He further submitted
that during the disciplinary proceedings as per the CCS rules the required
documents related to him will be given. To substantiate his claim he relied on a
decision of the earlier bench of the Commission dated 14.01.2019 in case no.
CIC/POST/A/2018/159728.



The appellant in his second appeal contested the reply of the CPIO and
pleaded that the denial of the information
 u/s 8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act is not
justified. He further submitted that he has been placed under suspension w.e.f
17.09.2019 by the MoEF Delhi. As per office procedure the matter of placing
under suspension of any officer has to be examined by the concerned Section
in view of the extant CCS (CCA) Rules 1965 and other Government instructions
and guidelines and the facts of the case. In his case, the opposite thing has
happened. In response to a fictitious and ill motivated report of death of 245
animals in NZP, he came to know from a number of newspaper reports that
Hon'ble Minister of State, Environment Forest and Climate Change had given a
statement about his suspension in the near future.As a result he was placed
under suspension. He further contested that this is enough to presume that he
was not placed under suspension following the proper procedure and
guidelines. Hence, he sought the copy of the notesheet that ultimately led to
his suspension with the approval of the competent authority. He also summed
up stating that refusal of information by both the CPIO and the FAA in a blunt
manner substantiates his above suspicion.



                                       2


 He submitted that in this case there is no investigation being conducted by the
Ministry. The content of the charges that they are yet to serve him has nothing
to do with the grounds of suspension. Not all the disciplinary cases are
initiated after placing the charged officer under suspension. Hence, it is very
clear that Sec 8(1)(h) is not applicable in this case and that disclosure of the
causes of the suspension, narrated in the concerned notesheet no way
hampers the oral inquiry in the disciplinary proceedings.



Observations:



On a perusal of the order relied upon by the CPIO, it was noted that the
Commission vide order dated 14.01.2019 in case no. CIC/POST/A/2018/159728
had held as follows:



      "5. The respondent submitted that though the chargesheet has been
      issued, enquiry is yet to attain completion. Hence, disclosure of
      information at this stage is likely to impede the disciplinary proceedings.
      He further stated that the information sought by the appellant is of
      composite nature because disciplinary action has been initiated against a
      group of 10-12 accused persons. Since the Enquiry in the case is still
      pending against some of the accused and the Disciplinary proceedings
      are yet to be completed, hence divulging information to any one of the
      co-accused is likely to impede the disciplinary proceedings against the
      accused. Hence, the information sought for was denied under 
Section
      8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act.



      Decision:



      6. The Commission, after hearing the submissions of both the parties and
      perusing the records, observes that the Commission in the case of
      Shankar Sharma & Ors. vs. DGIT [CIC/AT/A/2007/0007, 10 & 11]
      observed that :



                                       3


             ".....17. ..... the term 'investigation' used in 
Section 8(1)(h)
 ,
            in the context of this Act should be interpreted broadly and
            liberally. We cannot import into 
RTI Act
 the technical
            definition of 'investigation' one finds in Criminal Law. Here,
            investigation would mean all actions of law enforcement,
            disciplinary proceedings, enquiries, adjudications and so on.
            Logically, no investigation could be said to be complete
            unless it has reached a point where the final decision on the
            basis of that investigation is taken. In that sense, an
            investigation can be an extended investigation........The
            respondents are, therefore, right in holding that it would be
            a misnomer to hold that investigation in matters such as
            this, the moment the Investigating Officer submits his report
            to the competent authority spells the end of investigation."



7. Furthermore, the Commission in the decision of 
K.S. Prasad vs SEBI
CIC/AT/A/2007/007/00234
 had held as under:


      "...as soon as an investigation or an enquiry by a subordinate
      Enquiry Officer in Civil and Administrative matters comes to an end
      and, the investigation report is submitted to a higher authority, it
      cannot be said to be the end of investigation.... which can be truly
      said to be concluded only with the decision by the competent
      authority."



Thus the above ratio clearly indicates that the term "investigation" used
in the 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act requires a wider interpretation and
shall be read as inclusive of an enquiry conducted during disciplinary
proceedings.



                                  4


 8. It is further noted that this Commission had discussed a similar issue
and adjudicated the query of similar nature in the case of Govind Jha v.
Army HQs, [CIC/AT/A/2006/00039 dated 01.06.2006], holding as
hereunder:

            ".....although the rules of disciplinary proceedings provide
            for disclosure of all documents and information which
            constitute the basis for the disciplinary action against an
            employee, yet such employees demand additional
            information pertaining to them through the 
RTI Act
. These
            demands are mostly about disclosure of file-notings and
            other materials which otherwise would not be available to
            the employee under the Disciplinary Proceedings Rules. It
            has been the consistent position of the Commission that a
            disciplinary enquiry assumes the characteristics of an
            ongoing investigation and the material thereof cannot be
            disclosed under 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act."



9. Likewise, in the case of Shri P.K. Saha v. Shri D.B. Janotkar, General
Manager       (A&EE)    &     PIO,    Mahanadi      Coalfields    Limited,
CIC/AT/A/2007/00333 dated 17.08.2007, this Commission had held as
under:

            "When a specific law lays down the scope and the range of
            information to be disclosed to a person facing specified
            action at the hands of a public authority, it will be a sure
            interference with the process of investigation under that
            specific law if the affected person, or anybody else in his
            place, is allowed under the 
RTI Act
 to access a larger range
            of information than would be otherwise authorized."



                                 5


 10. The Commission while deciding the case of V.K. Gulati Vs. DG Vig.
Customs & Central Excise; [CIC/AT/A/2007/01508; Date of Decision:

17.06.2007], had taken the view that:

            "5. ..... disclosure of information relating to ongoing
            disciplinary proceedings, which are in the nature of ongoing
            investigations, will have the impact of compromising those
            proceedings and restricting the discretion of the Enquiry
            Officer to decide as to what documents the officer
            proceeded against will have access to. Since departmental
            enquiry is in the nature of ongoing investigation, it is
            covered by 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act. The only element
            which needs to be proved is whether the requested
            disclosure would impede the process of investigation. It has
            been the view of the Commission that such disclosures
            would impede the process of investigation in so far as these
            would affect the ability of the Enquiry Officer to conduct and
            regulate the extant departmental proceeding. It is also true
            that during any preliminary enquiry, a number of witnesses
            are examined and information is collected. Disclosure of this
            variety of information would undoubtedly bring out into the
            open its sources, which will be injurious to the interests of
            those who offer their assistance to the preliminary enquiry
            in the confidence that their identity would not be disclosed.



6. Commission has noted that a number of employees of the public
authorities facing departmental/vigilance and other forms of
proceedings from their respective managements have tended to use
the 
RTI Act
 to access information ⎯ specially file notings in their own
vigilance matters / disciplinary matters ⎯ in order to somehow lay hands
on evidence that they could use in their favour. Commission has no


                                6

 problem with such an approach but since premature disclosure of
information, specially file notings, prior to the final decision being made
in a disciplinary action has the potential to disrupt the proceedings,
Commission has been guarded in authorizing such disclosures. 
The RTI
Act
, apart from being a rights expanding instrument, it is also an
instrument for improving governance. In that sense, it is always helpful
to be guarded in interfering with the disciplinary proceedings, through
which the managements enforce discipline within the organization and
bring the guilty employees to book. Most disciplinary proceedings are
under laws, which prescribe the processes of the proceeding such as the
documents that can be disclosed to the officer proceeded against, the
discretion of the enquiry officers to decide what documents to be
disclosed to the accused officers in conformity with the norms of justice
and fairplay and so on. Each time an RTI proceeding is started to force
disclosure of documents, regardless of what the enquiry officers may
have to say on this, potentially the process of the enquiry is impeded.
Considering its large ramification, it is unsafe to authorize disclosure of
such information under the 
RTI Act
."



11. This Commision also observes that the Delhi High Court's decision
dated 10.11.2006, passed in W. P. (C) No. 16712/2006 in 
Surinder Pal
Singh vs. UOI & Ors.
, has held is as follows:


            ".....Since the chargesheet has been filed, the process of
            investigation has been completed but the petitioner cannot
            contend that there is no apprehension with the respondent
            that the information sought by the petitioner may impede
            the prosecution of the offender. Whether the respondents




                                 7

                   have apprehension or not is to be decided by the
                  respondents in the present facts and circumstances. The
                  apprehension of the respondents is not without any basis. In
                  any case the prosecution of the offender is pending. Since
                  prosecution of the offender is pending and has not been
                  completed, it can not be inferred that divulgence of
                  information will not impede the prosecution of the offender.
                  The respondents, therefore, are justified in claiming
                  exemption under 
Section 8 (1) (h)
 from disclosure of
                  information sought by the petitioner..."



      12. In the light of the aforementioned settled position of law, this
      Commission is of the considered opinion that the contention of the
      respondent is found reasonable and there appears no reason to interfere
      with the same. The appellant is at liberty to obtain necessary information
      from the Disciplinary Authority at the appropriate stage, which as a
      matter of legal norm is anyway made available to the accused to prove
      his innocence."

Based on a perusal of the record, it was noted that the CPIO vide letter dated
21.10.2019 replied that the information sought by the appellant cannot be
given
 u/s 8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act. The appellant being aggrieved with the reply
filed a first appeal. The FAA vide order dated 15.11.2019 held as follows:

       "....................As such the CPIO had replied to the RTI application well
       within the time limit of 30 days. Information as sought by the appellant
       comes within the ambit of the exemptions under the provisions of Sec 8
       of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 since the information is having relation with the
       process of investigation and its disclosure would impede the process. It
       may be mention here that as per order dated 16.09.2019 the grounds of


                                       8

       suspension in appellant's case are contemplated disciplinary proceeding
      against him. The memorandum of charges/chargesheet is being finalized
      and would be communicated to the appellant soon."



Decision:



Having heard both the parties, and after considering the contentions of the
CPIO and the rulings of the Commission in a similar subject matter, this bench
finds no ground to intervene with the CPIO's reply. Therefore, the reply is
considered proper and no further action lies.



            The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                           Vanaja N. Sarna (वनजा एन. सरना)
                                   Information Commissioner (सच
                                                              ू ना आय!
                                                                     ु त)
Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत          त)


A.K. Assija (ऐ.के. असीजा)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011- 26182594 /
 दनांक / Date





                                      9