[Cites 
17
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Pankaj Kumar vs Ministry Of Railways on 19 January, 2026


                             के ीय सूचना आयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                          बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                        नई िद ी, New Delhi - 110067


File No: CIC/MORLY/A/2024/122350

Pankaj Kumar                                            .....अपीलकता/Appellant

                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम

CPIO,
Railway Board,
Rail Bhavan, Raisina Marg,
New Delhi - 110 001                                   .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                     :    19.01.2026
Date of Decision                    :    19.01.2026

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :               Swagat Das

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on            :    13.05.2024
CPIO replied on                     :    30.05.2024
First appeal filed on               :    04.06.2024
First Appellate Authority's order   :    09.07.2024
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated          :    11.07.2024

Information sought
:



1.     The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 13.05.2024 (online) seeking
the following information:



      "Applicant is accused in criminal case no. 2/2017 which is under progress
      at Special CBI Court, Ghaziabad. Sanction to prosecute the applicant in
      court of Iaw was granted by an official in Ministry of Railway in response
      to CBI/ACB Ghaziabad registered case no: RC1202016A0010 against
      applicant. It may please be noted that investigation in the said case is

                                                                      Page 1 of 14

       completed as final charge sheet under section 173(2) CRPC has been filed
      by CBI in court of law on21/10/2016.

    In connection with above under 
RTI Act
. Kindly provide following
    documents (duly attested by gazzeted officer)


    i) Complete copy of file (including noting & correspondence) in which
       sanction to prosecute applicant under 
Section 19
 of PC Act was
       processed and granted to CBI.

    ii) Copy of correspondence/letter as per which prior sanction was sought by
       CBI under 
section 17A
 of PC Act to investigate role of applicant in FIR no.
       RC1202O16A0010 dated 23/8/2016.

    iii) Copy of Sanction granted by Ministry of Railways to CBI under
       
Section 17A
 of PC Act in response to correspondence/letter mentioned
       in para (ii) above.



    While disposing RTI request PIO is requested to kindly go through the
    following CIC order


 
a) The contents of CIC order no. CIC/SG/A/2012/371/17851 in the case
    titled 
Shri R. Govindarajan vs. UCO Bank
 in which CIC directed
    respondents to provide copy of noting of file in which sanction to
    prosecute the appellant was processed even when investigation was
    continuing. The case of applicant stands on better footing as
    investigation stands completed on 21/10/2016."




2.    The CPIO furnished a reply to the Appellant on 30.05.2024 stating as
under:



      "As per 
Sec. 24
 of RTI Act, CBI is exempted from the purview of the 
RTI
      Act
. Further, the case is also under prosecution before CBI Court. The
      requested information therefore can't be given under 
section 8(1)(g)
 and
      
8(1)(h)
 of RTI Act."



3.     The Appellant filed a First Appeal dated 04.06.2024. The FAA disposed of
first appeal vide order dated 09.07.2024, wherein following observations were
given:



      "1. & 2. The CBI/ACB/GZB, had classified their report as 'Confidential
      Document' and has advised that no reference of It may be made in any
      correspondence with the accused officers. Therefore, since the
      documents sought by the applicant includes documents received from
      CBI/ACB/Ghaziabad, the said information cannot be given to the

                                                                       Page 2 of 14

       appellant under 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of RTI Act 2005. The requisite
      information/documents are exempted under 
Section 24
 of RTI Act 2005,
      as some of these information/documents pertain to the CBI, which are
      sensitive in nature.



      Further, it may also reveal the identity of those entrusted in charge of
      processing the matter and thus, the life or physical safety of the person
      concerned would be endangered. Apart from the above, source of
      information or assistance given in confidence for law enforcement or
      security purposes would be identified. Therefore, the sought information
      cannot be given to the appellant under 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of RTI Act 2005.



      3. Copy of Sanction order for prosecution (against Dr. Pankaj Kumar)
      cannot be given to the appellant under 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of RTI Act 2005 as
      the information mentioned in the said sanction order would impede the
      process of prosecution of offender.



4.  Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied,         Appellant    approached     the
Commission with the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerged during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present in person.



Respondent: Shri R D Ram, JDV (A & P) and Shri Hemant Dabral, SO, Vigilance
is present in person.



5.    Proof of having served a copy of Second Appeal on Respondent while
      filing the same in CIC on 11.07.2024 is not available on record.

      Respondent confirms non-service.



6.    Written submissions of the Appellant are taken on record.



7.    The Appellant, during the hearing, reiterated the contents of his RTI
      application and instant appeal and submitted that the Respondent has
      wrongly denied the information as sought in his RTI application. The
      Appellant further referred to a decision of the Commission in file No.
      CIC/UBIND/A/2024/112476 dated 31.07.2025 in support of his
      arguments. The Appellant further reiterated the contents of his written
      submissions, which are reproduced hereinbelow:



                                                                     Page 3 of 14


 "1. Appellate Authority held that documents/details that have been
received from CBI is the basis of granting sanction to prosecute appellant
for offenses under 
Prevention of Corruption Act
. These documents are
alleged to be confidential as CBI falls under purview of 
Section 24
 of RTI
Act, 2005.



It is not in dispute that public authority cannot claim exemption under

Section 24
 of RTI Act. Further, CPIO and FAA never felt any need to issue
notice under 
Section 11
 of RTI Act to CBI which is third party in this case
to raise any claim for confidentiality for the supplied documents by CBI.
Thus, respondent public authority are estopped from taking any action in
this regard at the stage of second appeal.



It was obligatory on part of CPIO to discharge his statutory obligation
under 
Section 19(5)
 of RTI Act,2005 by making a factual foundation for
claiming exemption from disclosure under proviso of 
Section 8
 of RTI Act,
2005.But, there is not even a whisper of any documentary evidence
between CBI and public authority which could remotely establish the
confidentiality claim of documents received from CBI. Further, CPIO failed
to establish as to how 
Section 8(1)(h)
 is impede the process of
prosecution.



Further, as per 
Section 173(2)
 of CrPC, 1973 CBI investigation report is
opinion of CBI against appellant that is framed on the basis of evidences
collected by CBI during investigation on allegation of corruption made
against appellant by complainant on 22/8/2016.



Delhi High Court in case titled 
Union of India v Manjit Singh Bali
, 2018
Supreme (Del) 3039 (copy attached) held in para 20 that "Even if it is
assumed that certain information, which has been denied to the
respondent, was received from CBI, the question of withholding the same
would not arise if such information related to human right violation or
corruption". In this case, Delhi High Court ordered appellant Union of
India to provide prosecution sanction file to respondent and upheld
orders of Chief Information Commission vide order no.
CIC/POSTS/A/2017/131334 dated 30.6.2017(copy attached).




In the subject RTI case appellant is also seeking prosecution sanction file
only which is required to effectively cross-examine witness of prosecution

                                                                 Page 4 of 14

 (Investigating Officer) who will eventually appear in Special CBI Court,
Ghaziabad. The proposal to prosecute appellant was based on allegation
of corruption thus, facts of the case cited above supports the case of
appellant.



Further, it was incumbent on respondent to lay a factual foundation (if
any) to claim exclusion under 
Section 24(1)
 of RTI Act as per law laid
down in 
Union of India v Manjit Singh Bali
(supra) but respondent has
also miserably failed in this regard.




2. Sought information is required to avail the opportunity of cross-

examination effectively by putting contents of information received
through RTI to prosecution witness to challenge the validity of sanction
order which is necessary for maintainability of prosecution. It is settled
law that providing opportunity to accused in criminal case for effective
cross-examination is part of fundamental right of fair trial. Certainly, it is
in public interest to provide opportunity to citizens (i.e. accused-
appellant) for exercising their Right to Information for the purpose of
enforcement of fundamental rights. It is needles to mention that 
RTI Act

promotes transparency and accountability by disclosure of information
to citizens.



3. ⁠CPIO and FAA claimed exemption from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(g)

of RTI Act as this is their apprehension that disclosure of sought
information will give opportunity to appellant to threaten the officials
that have opined against appellant in that prosecution sanction file.



Appellant is on regular bail granted by Honourable High Court Allahabad
since 2017 on condition that appellant will not misuse liberty granted
through regular bail by threatening the witness of the prosecution. Thus,
even an attempt by appellant to flout the conditions imposed in bail
order will expose appellant to danger of cancellation of bail. Therefore,
apprehended situation to claim exemption under 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of RTI
Act,2005 by respondent is not possible.



Further, there is not a single incidence since 2017 that supports the
contention of CPIO and FAA to justify denial of sought information under

Section 8(1)(g)
 of RTI Act,2005."



                                                                   Page 5 of 14


 8.   Written submissions dated 09.01.2026 of the Respondent are taken on
     record and the same is reproduced hereinbelow:



     "The reply of the said RTI application was sent to the applicant vide this
     office letter No. MORLY/R/E/24/02658 (2024/V4/NR/AC/RTI/03) dated
     30.05.2024 wherein the sought information was denied under 
Section
     24
, 
8(1)(g)
 & 
8(1)(h)
 of RTI Act 2005.



     Thereafter, Sh. Pankaj Kumar preferred 1st appeal dated 04.06.2024
     under 
RTI Act
 2005, with a request seeking information sought vide his
     RTI application dated 13.05.2024. The said appeal dated 04.06.2024 was
     disposed off vide this office letter No. MORLY/A/E/24/00536
     (2024/V4/NR/AC/RTI/03) dated 09.07.2024 wherein it was informed to
     the appellant that the information sent to him vide CPIO letter dated
     30:05.2024 was in order and no infirmity was found in the said reply.



     Sh. Pankaj Kumar has now preferred 2nd appeal to Hon'ble CIC under 
RTI
     Act, 2005
. Notice of hearing for appeal/complaint No.
     CIC/MORLY/A/2024/122350 dated 29.12.2025 has been received in this
     office on 06.01.2026.

     In this connection, it is mentioned that the information sought by the
     applicant (Sh. Pankaj Kumar) relates to documents received from
     CBI/ACB/Ghaziabad. The CBI/ACB/GZB had classified their report as
     'Confidential Document' and has advised that no reference of it may be
     made in any correspondence with the accused officers. Providing the
     sought information/documents to the applicant may also reveal the
     identity of those entrusted in charge of processing the matter and thus,
     the life or physical safety of the person concerned would be endangered.
     Apart from the above, source of information or assistance given in
     confidence for law enforcement or security purposes may be identified.
     Further, since proceedings against Sh Pankaj Kumar in the said case are
     yet to be concluded, revealing the sought information may impede the
     process of inquiry/proceedings.

     In view of the above, the information was denied by the CPIO as well as
     the FAA."



                                                                     Page 6 of 14


 9.    From the perusal of the reply of the CPIO, it is noted that the
      information is denied under 
Sections 8(1)(g)
, 
8(1)(h)
 and 
Section 24
 of
      the RTI Act and further noted that they have categorically informed the
      Appellant that "The CBI/ACB/GZB had classified their report as
      'Confidential Document' and has advised that no reference of it may be
      made in any correspondence with the accused officers. Providing the
      sought information/documents to the applicant may also reveal the
      identity of those entrusted in charge of processing the matter and thus,
      the life or physical safety of the person concerned would be endangered.
      Apart from the above, source of information or assistance given in
      confidence for law enforcement or security purposes may be identified.
      Further, since proceedings against Sh Pankaj Kumar in the said case are
      yet to be concluded, revealing the sought information may impede the
      process of inquiry/proceedings."



10.   Upon being queried by the Commission, the Respondent stated that
      copy of written submissions has already been provided to the Appellant.



      Decision:



11.   The Commission upon a perusal of records and after submissions of both
      the parties, notes that the core contention of the Appellant revolves
      around the issue of denial of information by the CPIO under 
Section
      8(1)(g)
, 
8(1)(h)
 and 
Section 24
 of RTI Act. In response to which the CPIO
      informed the factual position that the information sought cannot be
      provided under the 
RTI Act
.



12.   The Commission is of the view that since the criminal case involving
      inter-alia the Appellant is still pending with the CBI, directing the
      Respondent to provide any information (which is held and originated by
      them) would affect the proceedings of the case.



13.   Before deciding on the issue of disclosure of information, the
      complexities involved in such corruption trials and how disclosure of
      information may dilute the proceedings has to be understood. The
      Hon'ble High Court of Madras in a recent judgement in 
Gulab Singh
      Rana vs. CPIO, Indian Overseas Bank, WP No
 37231/ 2016 decided on

                                                                     Page 7 of 14

 08.12.2021 has elaborately dealt with the issue. The following
observations are particularly relevant to the instant matter:




"38. The petitioner requested for a copy of request letter received from
CBI for seeking sanction, copy of internal office memorandum containing
the opinion/views of Disciplinary Authority for giving sanction for
prosecution, copy of first advice given by CVC, New Delhi, the outcome of
the reconciliatory meeting between Disciplinary Authority and CBI office
of the New Delhi, the copy of any further clarification sought for by the
CVC, the copy of internal office memorandum containing the
opinion/views of Disciplinary Authority for giving sanction for
prosecution, the copy of latest correspondence from CVC
requesting/advising the Bank, the copy of internal office memorandum
containing the opinion/views of the present Disciplinary Authority and
finally copy of draft sanction supplied by CBI.

39. Considering the nature of questions sought for, interestingly, the first
information is the request letter received from the CBI for seeking
sanctioning. The said letter may have certain information pertaining to
the investigation/interrogation. The second document is copy of internal
office memorandum containing the opinion/views of the Disciplinary
Authority.

40 .This Court is of the considered opinion that note file, opinions, views
of the Disciplinary Authority may vary from time to time based on the
informations and based on the collection of facts and evidences. Even at
later point of time, initial opinion may not be final opinion in many cases.
Subsequent facts may provide a different views and opinion and
therefore, if the copy of the opinion and views are supplied, it will create
unnecessary hindrance for the peaceful investigation, interrogation and
to proceed with the departmental disciplinary proceedings as well as the
criminal proceedings. For example, on receipt of the preliminary report,
the Disciplinary Authority would have formed certain opinions or
expressed some views. However, those opinions and views cannot be
construed as final, as far as the decisions to be taken. During subsequent
period, if further documents are made available or certain other facts are
placed, then the Disciplinary Authority may change his opinion or views.
This is exactly the reason why, in disciplinary case, the rule contemplates
opportunities to the delinquent officials. Therefore, the internal office
memorandum containing opinion/views if supplied, undoubtedly,
would create unnecessary issues as the petitioner will certainly rely on
the document for the purpose of destroying the case. However, any



                                                                 Page 8 of 14

 accused/delinquent officials is entitled to defend his case in the manner
known to law.

41. Thus, furnishing of such opinions and views of the Disciplinary
Authority at various stages, if provided under the 
RTI Act
, then it will
hamper the continuation of the disciplinary proceedings and further,
disrupt the investigation to be conducted by the investigating agency.

42. Perusal of other documents and information sought for by the
petitioner are all relatable to the reconciliatory meeting between the
officials. Clarifications sought for by the CVC, latest correspondence etc.,
of such information and documents sought for reveals that it is between
the authorities and more so, relating to views/opinions, internal
correspondences etc.,

43. No doubt, all such correspondences are protected under 
Section 8
 of
the RTI Act. However, it is the "subjective satisfaction" of the authorities.
The "subjective satisfaction" must be considered by the Public
Information Officer, while complying with the request of the information
seekers. This exactly is the purpose and object of 8(h) of the Act. "
Section
8(h)
 contemplates of information which would impede the process of
investigation or apprehension or prosecution of offenders."

44. Where the circumstances narrated under 
Section 8(h)
 on that
informations, which would impede the process of investigation or
apprehension or prosecution of offenders. Thus, if the information
provided, would cause any hindrance to the investigation or
apprehension or prosecution of offenders. The language employed is
"Apprehension". Thus, "Apprehension" of the competent authority is also
considered in the legislation. The word "Apprehension", no doubt, can be
interpreted widely and further, it provides discretion to the authorities
for forming an opinion, whether there is an "Apprehension" or not. In this
regard, the subjective satisfaction of the competent authority is of
paramount importance. The Public Information Officer is expected to
consider in the event of furnishing such informations, which all are
connected with the investigation or prosecution of offenders and
providing of such informations, would impede the process, then, he is
empowered to exercise power of discretion and reject the application of
the information seeker. Thus, the scope of 
section 8(h)
 is to be
understood, with reference to the context and to the subjective
satisfaction of the authorities competent. If the competent authority
satisfied that there is a likelihood of impede the process of investigation
or prosecution of offenders, then such informations or documents shall
be denied.



                                                                  Page 9 of 14


 45. The purpose and object of the exemption clause is to ensure that the
administrative confidentiality are protected and because of providing of
information, the further continuation of investigation or prosecution
cannot be impeded. This being the scope of exemption under 
Section
8(h)
, the questions sought for by the petitioner in the present case with
reference to 8(h) is to be considered.

46. As discussed in the aforementioned paragraphs, the questions and
documents sought for by the petitioner in the present case is relatable
to internal office memorandum containing opinions/views of
reconciliatory meeting between the Disciplinary Authority and CBI
clarification sought for by CVC internal office memorandum containing
opinions/views latest correspondences from CVC etc.,

47. This Court is of the considered opinion that such informations, if
provided, it will create unnecessary hampering of the Disciplinary
Proceedings or the prosecution. Even an apprehension in this regard is
sufficient is to deny information to the applicants. The word
"Apprehension" is employed in the Act, so as to protect the prosecution
and process of investigation, which should not be paralyzed at any
circumstances in the public interest. When the investigation is
undertaken, then the authorities must be provided with an amount of
discretion for the purpose of culling out the truth in respect of the
allegations. Thus, any hindrance in between, would undoubtedly
paralyze the investigation process, which would dilute the prosecution
and would extend unlawful benefit to the accused persons.

48. The opinions and views formed by the competent authorities on
every stage may vary or change depending on the progress made in the
investigation and based on the further facts culled out from and out of
the evidence. During the course of such investigation or prosecution, if
information are provided regarding the opinions already formed, then
undoubtedly the same will hamper further investigation and disrupt
the prosecution to be conducted by the agency. If such nature of
information or documents are provided, then it may not be possible to
proceed with the prosecution for the purpose of establishing the
offence.

49. In this context, the rights of both the parties should be considered by
the Courts. It is not only the right of the information seekers, but the
right of the information provider must also be considered by this Court.
Whenever a statutory right is conferred to the citizen, equally such right
is conferred to the other citizen, whose interest is also to be protected
before allowing a person to exercise such a statutory right. To elaborate,
right and duties are corresponding terms, so also, rights can be exercised

                                                                Page 10 of 14

 by any citizen, honouring the corresponding rights of the other citizen. It
is exactly the constitutional perspective and the philosophy. Take a case,
where information or documents are mechanically provided to the
information seekers in all circumstances, then the right and duties of the
investigating agency and the prosecutors are denied, establishing their
cases before the competent Court of law or before the Disciplinary
Authority. Thus, a balancing approach is required, while implementing
the provisions of the 
RTI Act
. It is not as if, an information seeker is
entitled to get all information and documents including certain internal
correspondences and views or opinions recorded by the competent
authorities then and there and time to time. Therefore, practical and
pragmatic approach coupled with rules of constructive interpretation is
of paramount importance to take a decision in such circumstances. In the
event of committing any lapses, the same would provide unlawful gain to
the accused/delinquent persons, which would result in destruction of the
prosecution or the case of the Disciplinary Authority and larger the public
interest involved in the matter of criminal prosecution is also to be
considered by the Court. State being the prosecutors, right of
investigation, collected evidence, record the opinions and views in those
files must be protected in all circumstances and by obtaining all such
information and documents from the competent authorities, the accused
may not be allowed to destroy the basis of prosecution as such
views/opinions or internal correspondence can never be construed as
final opinion/views or the final decision.

50. Considering the fact that the Central Information Commission
elaborately considered the grounds raised by the petitioner in the order
passed in the Second Appeal, arrived a conclusion that the exemption
granted to CBI from applicability of the 
RTI Act
, in terms of 
Section
24(1)
 would became meaningless. If RTI applicants would get
information from another Public Authority, the very information that
they cannot get from the CBI or information, inexplicably linked to the
information and materials provided by the CBI to the Public Authority.

51. The above findings of the Central Information Commission explicitly
clarifies that what an information seeker could not able to get from the
CBI, cannot attempt to get from his employer or from other agencies.
Such calculated applications filed under the 
RTI Act
, at no
circumstances, are entertainable. In the present case, the information
and documents sought for are no doubt relating to the files being
maintained by the CBI and about the investigation of the Criminal case,
so also pertaining to the sanction, which all are relatable to
investigation/interrogation or prosecution. Thus, the first proviso to


                                                                Page 11 of 14


Section 24(1)
 cannot be extended merely under the ground that the
      word 'Corruption' is employed in the Statute.

      52. Distinctions are to be drawn in this regard and 
Section 24(1)
 proviso
      must be read and understood along with the spirit of 
Section 8(h)
 of
      the Right to Information Act. Rule of constructive interpretation in such
      circumstances are imminent to ensure that the purpose and object of
      the 
RTI Act
 is not defeated. So also at the time of providing information
      or documents, the rights of other parties and the criminal laws system
      of prosecution by the State is not affected or destroyed on account of
      providing such confidential information to the information seekers.

      53. In view of the principles considered by this Court in the
      aforementioned paragraphs, this Court is able to form a concrete
      opinion that the information and documents sought for by the
      petitioner are rightly rejected by the Public Information Officer, Indian
      Overseas Bank, First Appellate Authority and finally by the Central
      Information Commission/Second Appellate Authority."



14.   Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in 
Union of India vs. Shiv
      Narain, WP(C
) 7204/2016 dated 27.03.2019 which pertains to similar
      facts and circumstances advised the information seeker to obtain the
      information from the concerned trial court where the matter was
      pending. The relevant observations are hereunder:




 
"2. The respondent herein sought information from the petitioner on the
      following two issues:- "1. Whether the report vide letter no. RSVY/CE/CE &
      PM/55(1) 892 dated 12.02.2013 addressed to Inspector of police, CBI, ACB,
      Patna by Shri D.S. Kapur CE cum PM RSVY project Zone, CPWD, Patna in
      connection with the subject 
referred above
 was submitted by the CBI before
      the sanctioning Authority before grant of prosecution sanction. 2. The certified
      copy of the note sheet of the above mentioned case from the beginning to the
      issue of prosecution sanction may also be given for which I am ready to pay
      the requisite fee."


      4. Learned counsel for the respondent has fairly drawn my attention to an
      order dated February 12, 2019 passed by the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No.
      1632/2019, which is an appeal arising from the orders passed by the
      Coordinate Bench of this Court in W.P.(C) 2272/2013 dated September 16,
      2014 and the Division Bench in LPA 471/2015 dated August 17, 2015, wherein
      information also includes copy of the note sheet for processing the decision to
      refer the said case to Anti Corruption Branch of CBI for investigation. In the
      said case, the said information was denied to the petitioner Ashok Kumar
      Sharma.



                                                                          Page 12 of 14


       5. The Supreme Court in its order dated February 12, 2019 has held as under:-

      4. The dispute remains about document Nos.1, 3 and 4 as they were not
      supplied considering the provisions of 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of the Right to
      Information Act which prohibits disclosure of information connected with
      ongoing investigations and prosecutions and it was opined that it was
      source information that has triggered the anti-corruption proceedings and
      nothing should be done which affects the proceedings or which compromises
      the position of the sources of information.

      5. In view of the aforesaid reasons employed by the Information
      Commissioner, we are of the opinion that there was justification in refusing
      to supply the aforesaid documents. However, as rightly pointed out by
      learned counsel for the appellant that during the course of trial, if the trial
      Court feels it appropriate and if a prayer is made, the documents may be
      called by Court in accordance with law.

      6. The learned counsel for the respondent submits that the respondent herein
      shall have the liberty to seek the document, which he has sought under the 
RTI
      Act
 from the learned Trial Court, in terms of the order of the Supreme Court.

      Suffice it would be to state that it is for the respondent herein to seek
      appropriate orders from the learned Trial Court. In view of the order of the
      Supreme Court, the order of the CIC dated February 29, 2016, is set aside, the
      writ petition is allowed."



15.   The Commission further observes that the FAA vide letter dated
      09.07.2024 had given comprehensive observations/decisions on the RTI
      application and first appeal of the Appellant.



16.   The Appellant neither in his RTI application nor in his Second Appeal has
      established any larger public interest and his locus in seeking such
      information.



17.   Further, the decisions as referred by the Appellant is not at all related
      with the facts of the present case.



18.   In the light of the above observations and latest judgements of the
      superior courts, the Commission finds no reason to interfere in the
      decision of CPIO and FAA.



19.   The Commission finds no infirmity in the reply and as a sequel to it
      further clarifications tendered by the CPIO during hearing as the same
      was found to be in consonance with the provisions of 
RTI Act
.

                                                                         Page 13 of 14


 20.   No intervention of the Commission is warranted in the matter.



            The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                           Sd/-

                                                 Swagat Das ( ागत दास)
                                  Information Commissioner (सू चना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स ािपत ित)

(Archana Srivastva)
Dy. Registrar
011-26107040
Date : 19.01.2026

Copy To:



The FAA,
Railway Board,
Rail Bhavan, Raisina Marg,
New Delhi - 110 001

Shri Pankaj Kumar,





                                                                  Page 14 of 14

                                    Recomendation(s) to PA under 
section 25(5)
 of the RTI Act, 2005:-



                                   Nil




Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)