[Cites 
19
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Shish Pal vs Ministry Of Cooperation on 13 October, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                  के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                           Central Information Commission
                               बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                            Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                             नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/MOCOP/A/2023/636065 +
          CIC/MOCOP/A/2023/624200 +
          CIC/MOCOP/A/2023/608920


SHISH PAL                                                     ......अपीलकता /Appellant

                                            VERSUS
                                             बनाम

1. The CPIO,
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION, GOVT.
OF INDIA, ATAL AKSHAY URJA BHAWAN,
CGO COMPLEX, LODHI ROAD,
BEHIND NIA BUILDING,
NEW DELHI 110003 .

2. The CPIO,
National Council for Cooperative
Training, 3, Siri Institutional Area,
August Kranti Marg, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi-110016.                                        .... ितवादीगण /Respondent (s)


Date of Hearing                         :   04/10/2023
Date of Decision                        :   04/10/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :                  Saroj Punhani

Note - The above-mentioned Appeals have been clubbed together for decision
as these are based on similar RTI Applications.
Relevant facts emerging from appeal (s):

                                              1
 RTI applications filed on          :   01/04/2023, 17/03/2023, 14/11/2022
CPIO replied on                    :   20/04/2022 & 08/05/2023, 13/04/2023 &
                                       13/12/2022
First appeals filed on             :   13/05/2023, 21/04/2023 & 22/12/2022
First Appellate Authority orders   :   13/06/2023, 10/05/2023 & 24/01/2023
2nd Appeals/Complaint dated        :   25/07/2023, 18/05/2023 & 16/02/2023


                            CIC/MOCOP/A/2023/636065
Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 01.04.2023 with the CPIO, Ministry of
Cooperation seeking the following information:



"The following information in respect of your department organization National
Council for Cooperative Training (NCCT), New Delhi may please be supplied as
early as possible: -



      1. A certified copy of India Gazette notification announcing the appointment
      of Sh. Mohan Kumar Mishra as Permanent Secretary of NCCT, New Delhi,
      under the Ministry of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, Govt.
      of India, Ministry effective at that time.



      2. If Secretary, NCCT, New Delhi holding the current charge of NCCT
      Secretary, kindly provide the certified relevant document and approval of
      Govt. in respect of current charge of NCCT Secretary, New Delhi.



      3. Certified copy of list of cases filed by NCCT, New Delhi and against to
      NCCT, New Delhi in respect of its employee's service matters and other since
      January 2008 to till date with details of expenditure made in these cases
      and result thereof.



      4. Certified copy of list of disciplinary inquiries holded by NCCT New Delhi
      against its employees from January 2008 to till date and expenditure made
      on these proceedings and result thereof (kindly provide expenditure details
      and result case wise).



      5. Certified copy of expenditure incurred by NCCT, New Delhi on Secretary
      (Sh. Mohan Kumar Mishra) entire tour programmes from his appointment
      to the present date, including boarding, lodging, and travel agency fees.



                                         2


       (Please provide year wise details on head wise spending such as Boarding.
      Lodging & Travel agent Fees).



      6. Certified copy of Centre Govt. instructions vide which Group-C Employees
      of NCCT and its training units which has appointed on average in violations
      of Advertisement and Recruitment Rules and presently giving all benefits of
      permanent employment whereas eligible candidates were eligible at that
      time.



      7. Please provide certified copy for the action taken on these Employees
      mentioned at Sr. No. 6 or any FIR has been lodged by NCCT, New Delhi.
      Please also provide details what action/any inquiry has been initiated
      against these Employees.



      8. Please provide the certified copy of the Internal Committee's Proceedings
      of every meeting which was constituted by NCCT New Delhi vide letter
      dated 2-11/2021-Pers dated 06.04.2022 for RICM, Chandigarh in respect of
      Temporary Employees cases and recommendations of this internal
      committee and result thereof.



      9. Certified copy of expenditure incurred by NCCT, New Delhi including its
      units for hiring legal counsels for defending RTI Cases In Central Information
      Commission. Please provide case wise expenditure details.



      10. NCCT, New Delhi vide letter F.No.3-1/16/96-Pers dated 02.09.2013 vide
      which the undersigned allowed to continue as Steno (English) till the
      decision is taken by the Court of Chief Commissioner Person with Disabilities
      (CCPD), New Delhi but NCCT has again terminated before the decision of
      CCPD, New Delhi. Please provide the Govt. instructions for 2nd termination
      of the undersigned for which NCCT has compelled for violations their own
      letter dated 02.09.2013 or any order issued by NCCT, New Delhi should not
      be trusted in future."



The CPIO, Ministry of Cooperation, New Delhi transferred the RTI Application to
the CPIO, National Council for Cooperative Training, New Delhi on 20.04.2023 for
taking necessary action in the matter.



The CPIO, National Council for Cooperative Training, New Delhi furnished a
pointwise reply to the appellant on 08.05.2023 stating as under:



                                         3


       "1. No such information is available in this office.



      2. 
RTI Act
 does not empower applicant to seek question. Moreover, no such
      information is available.



      3 & 4. The information sought is vague. However, no such information is
      available in this office.



      5, 6 & 7. No such information is available in the NCCT (HQ).



      8. The matter is not finalized. Hence, the information may not be provided.



      9. No such information is available in this office.



      10. No such information is available in the NCCT (HQ)."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 13.05.2023. FAA's order
dated 13.06.2023 held as under:



       "....2. The response of the CPIO, NCCT, New Delhi dated 08.05.2023 with
reference to RTI application of appellant has been perused. It has been observed
that the applicant has asked for a copy of the Gazette notification of the
appointment of the Secretary, NCCT at Point No.1. As there is no Gazette
notification, the CPIO has rightly furnished information that no such information is
available. Pertaining to Point No. 2, it is observed that the applicant was not
sure of what information he had sought by making a conditional statement.
However, considering the unexplained intention of the exact information the
applicant sought, it is felt that he wanted a copy of the Order of the Ministry of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare vide which the present
incumbent of the post of Secretary, NCCT has been absorbed as a permanent
employee of the NCCT which CPIO may furnish to the appellant.



       3. With regard to Points at 3, 4, 5 and 9, the DoPT guidelines in this regard
are clear, and as per which the 
RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is
available and existing. If a Public authority has any information in the form of data
or abstracts, or statistics, an applicant may access to such information, subject to
the exemptions under 
Section 8
 of the Act. But where the information sought is
not part of the record of a public authority, and where such information is not
required to be maintained under any law or rules or regulation of the public



                                          4

 authority, the Act does not cast an obligation upon the public authority to collect
such non-available information and then furnish to an applicant.



        4. Patently, no data/information with reference to RTI queries at Points 3, 4,
5, and 9 has been complied and the CPIO has rightly informed the appellant that
'no such information is available'. In so far as RTI query at Points 6 and 7 are
concerned, the query at Point 6 is found to be ambiguous and contradictory,
lacking clarity. Therefore, it is not possible to provide any information with
reference to RTI query at Point 6 and since query at Point 7 relates to Point No. 6,
it is not possible to provide any information to it, either. The CPIO has been found
to have given right and complete information that no information as sought by
the appellant exists.



       5. Pertaining to RTI query at Point No. 8, it is noticed that formation of
Internal Commines for examination of any issue for its resolution is a routine
matter and the reports submitted by such Committees are confidential nature and
that it is not necessary that the views or recommendations of such Committees
are to be invariably accepted/implemented by the competent authority.
Therefore, the CPIO has given the right Information to the appellant.



       6. Pertaining to the query at Point No. 10, it has been brought to my notice
that the appellant has already challenged the decision of termination of his
services in a Court of Law and the RICM Chandigarh has already filed a counter
reply and the appellant is fully aware of the information he has sought. Besides his
query about the Govt. instructions for his second termination lacks clarity and the
CPIO has rightly informed him that 'no such information is available'.



       7. Pertaining to his request to refund of Rs.40/- after deducting Rs.10/-, the
appellant is informed that he had deposited Rs. 50/- by IPO voluntarily against the
prescribed fee of Rs.10/- without having been asked for to deposit money in the
manner he had deposited. He is further informed that there is no provision in the
Right to Information (Regulation of Fees and Cost) Rules, 2005 to refund fees.



       8. In view of the above facts and grounds of the case and the observations
made thereon, the First appeal of the appellant in respect of his above mentioned
RTI application has been disposed of with the directions to the CPIO, NCCT HQ to
furnish a copy of the Order No. A-11011/6/2011-CET dated 27.06.2018 of Ministry
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare free of cost within 15 days."



                                          5


 In compliance with FAA's order, the CPIO furnished a revised reply to the
Appellant on 17.07.2023 by enclosing a copy of Order No. 11-1/2/2022- Per dated
13.06.2023.



                          CIC/MOCOP/A/2023/624200

Information sought:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 17.03.2023 with Respondent no. 2
seeking the following information:



      "1. I want to know under 
RTI Act, 2005
, how many temporary/Casual
      labour/contractual employees have been regularized in compliance of Govt.
      of India Ministry of Personnel PG & Pensions Department of Personnel &
      Training instructions No.49014/7/2020-Estt (C) dated 07 October 2020
      regarding regularization of qualified workers appointed against sanctioned
      posts-Uma Devi Judgment-facts/clarification in your department and its
      training units. Please provide certified copy in this regard.



      2. I want to know under 
RTI Act, 2005
 that 'Grievance Redressal Officer of
      Divyangjan has been appointed in accordance with section-10 Right of
      Person with Disabilities Rules 2017 and section-23 of Right of Person with
      
Disabilities Act, 2016
 in your department or not.



      3. Please provide the details of Employees which have been appointed on
      Contract/Outsource/Casual Labour/Temporary in Group-C and Group-D in
      your department and its training units in the following table format which is
      enclosed as Annexure-A


      4. Please provide the details of separate 100-point Reservation Roster
      Registers has been prepared for Person with Disabilities under Right of
      Person with 
Disabilities Act, 2016
 in your department from 2010 to till date.



      5. Please provide the details how many vacancies are vacant and identified
      in Group-C and Group- D category along with description of Post which is
      idented for Divyangjan as per Notification dated 04/01/2021 issued from
      Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment for Divyangjan under Right of
      Person with 
Disabilities Act, 2016
 in your department and its training units.



                                        6


      6. Please provide the details of Group-C Employees which have been
     appointed on back door entry in your department (NCCT) and its training
     units and till date whose services are temporary but is being given all
     benefits of Permanent Employment without any instructions Govt. of India
     and the Applicant wants to know any committee has been constituted to
     check the irregularity in the said recruitments.



     7. Please provide the salary details at present of Temporary Employees
     whose cases are pending in Hon'ble High Court/s of your department or its
     training units along with CWP No. and present case status.



     8. Please provide the certified copy of seniority list of LDC issued by your
     department vide letter No. 2-12/2021-Pers dated 09.03.2023.



     9. The Applicant wants to know under 
RTI Act, 2005
 that your department
     whenever has issued any order to Applicant is absolutely 100% reliable or if
     any violations has made by your department officers, then what is the
     provision of disciplinary action for that, or any order issued by your
     department should not be trusted.



     10. I want to know under 
RTI Act, 2005
 When will the seniority list of LDC
     and Group-D be put on the website your department organization i.e NCCT,
     New Delhi."



The CPIO/ Respondent no. 2 furnished a pointwise reply to the appellant on
13.04.2023 stating as under:



     "1. No such information is available in this office.



     2. No separate Grievance Officer has been appointed for persons with
     disabilities.



     3. No such information in the desired format is available in NCCT (HQ).



     4. Reservation Roaster Register for all reserved categories including person
     with disabilities is maintained in NCCT.

     5. There is no Group 'D' now. At present no post in Group C vacancy falls for
     person with disabilities in the Reservation Roaster Register in NCCT.



     6 & 7. No such information is available in the NCCT.



                                         7


      8. The seniority list for LDC is uploaded on the NCCT website i.e., ncct.ac.in.



     9. No such information is available in this office.



     10. The Seniority List for LDC and MTS is uploaded on the NCCT website i.e.,
     ncct.ac.in. There is no Group 'D' now."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 21.04.2023. FAA's
order, dated 10.05.2023, upheld the reply of the CPIO.



                          CIC/MOCOP/A/2023/608920
Information sought:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 14.11.2022 with Respondent no. 2
seeking the following information:



     "1. Please provide the certified copy of the list of Employees for Group C and
     Group D/causal Labor who are given salary Equal pay for equal work as per
     instructions for Govt. of India in the following format:



     2. Please provide a certified copy of the letter/instructions issued from
     Ministry of Agriculture/Ministry of Cooperations to NCCT, New Delhi for
     regularize the services of Employees working on contractual /daily
     wages/Temporary LDC/ Casual Labour etc. under NCCT or its Training Units
     who are working before the year 2012 or who has completed 10 years'
     service in respective post.



     3. Please provide the certified copy of salary and allowances like HRA, TA
     and Annual Increment etc. to Equal Pay and Equal Work Employees which is
     given in Vamnicom, Pune and provide the status of appointment.



     4. Please provide the certified copy of Govt. instructions based on which
     Equal Pay for Equal Work Employees working Head office, NCCT or its

                                         8

      Training Units converted into Outsource (through Contractor) from
     department role.



     5. I want to know under 
RTI Act, 2005
 whether there is any planning of
     NCCT, Head office to regularize the services of contractual/outsources/daily
     wages Temporary LDC/Equal Pay for Equal Work Employees in compliance
     of Govt. letter No.49014/7/2020-Estt (C) dated 07 October 2020.



     6. Please provide the certified copy of Internal Committee Proceedings of
     RICM, Chandigarh dated 11.04.2022 which was constituted vide letter
     dated 2-11/2021-Pers dated 06.04.2022


     7. Please provide the certified copy of the Internal Committee's
     Recommendations of RICM, Chandigarh which was constituted vide letter
     dated 2-11/2021-Pers dated 06.04.2022 to examine the cases of temporary
     employees which was submitted to the Secretary, NCCT, New Delhi.



     8. Please provide the comments of Appointing Authorities Secretary, NCCT,
     New Delhi on the recommendations of the Internal Committee's
     Recommendations.



     9. Please provide the certified copy of the Final Report/decision based on
     the Internal Committee's Recommendations of RICM, Chandigarh which
     was constituted vide letter dated 2-11/2021-Pers dated 06.04.2022.



     10. Please provide the certified copy of Office Order No. 2-11/2021-Pers
     dated 23.05.2022.



     11. Please provide the information that how many divyangjan has been
     employed by NCCT or its Training Units in Group-C and Group-D vacancies in
     compliance with the 4% reservation in each Group-C and Group-D under the
     Rights of Person with 
Disabilities Act, 2016
."



The CPIO/ Respondent no. 2 furnished a pointwise reply to the appellant on
13.12.2022 stating as under:



     "1. A copy of instructions issued by NCCT is enclosed.



     2 & 3. No such information is available in this office.



                                         9


       4. Copy of letter dated 24.07.2012 received from the Deptt. Of Agriculture
      and Cooperation is enclosed.



      5. This is not covered under the ambit of the 
RTI Act, 2005
.



      6 & 7. The matter is under consideration. Hence, copies may not be
      provided.



      8 & 9. No such information is available in this office.



      10. Copy of Office Order is enclosed.



      11. Recruitment was made in 2017 only when one disabled person was
      appointed as MTS in NCCT who has since resigned from service on
      29.07.2021. No further recruitment has been made in NCCT."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 22.12.2022. FAA's order
dated 24.01.2023 upheld the reply of the CPIO with the following observations:



      "....I have investigated appeal preferred by you and find that the
      information available with the Public Authority was sent to you within the
      prescribed time limit of one month. Further, I find that the Public Authority
      has already provided information sought by you and as permissible under
      
RTI Act
. There is no special provision for persons with disabilities under the
      
RTI Act
; neither any discrimination has been made to you by the Public
      Authority. Copies of orders left behind inadvertently are enclosed."



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant set of Second Appeals.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present through video-conference.

Respondent(s): Manish Bhatia, CPIO along with D. N. Sahoo, Consultant present
in person.



The consolidated written submission filed by the CPIO prior to the hearing is
taken on record.



                                         10


 The Appellant while reiterating the contents of impugned RTI Applications
expressed his dissatisfaction with the fact that the reply provided by the CPIO was
vague and unsatisfactory. Further, the plea taken by the CPIO regarding non-
availability of records is unacceptable as evidence in support of his contention
lies with him .



The CPIO also reiterated the contents of his replies and further submitted that
whatever information was available in their office has already been parted with
the Appellant. Further, the information sought by the Appellant in a particular
format are not available in the desired form and collation/ compilation of which
would divert the resources of Respondent Public Authority and therefore, can not
be provided in view of 
Section 7(9)
 of RTI Act.



Decision:



The Commission at the outset based upon a perusal of facts on records and after
hearing submissions of the both the parties , is of the considered view that the
Appellant has sought information through instant RTI Applications of such a vague
and indeterminate nature merely to pressurize the Respondent public authority
into acceding to his request for similar nature of information.



It appears that the Appellant has grossly misconceived the idea of exercising his
Right to Information as being absolute and unconditional. It is rather unfortunate
that even the best of intentions have to not only stand the test of procedural
requirements and fetters laid down in the 
RTI Act
 but also stand the test of
practicality, a notion well recognised by superior Courts through various
judgments such as the Hon'ble Supreme Court's observation in 
Central Board of
Secondary Education (CBSE) & Anr. v. Aditya Bandhopadhyay and others
 [(2011)
8 SCC 497] stating that:




   "37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and right to
   information are intended to be formidable tools in the hands of responsible
   citizens to fight corruption and to bring in transparency and accountability.

   The provisions of 
RTI Act
 should be enforced strictly and all efforts should
   be made to bring to light the necessary information under clause (b)
   of 
section 4(1)
 of the Act which relates to securing transparency and
   accountability in the working of public authorities and in discouraging
   corruption. But in regard to other information,(that is information other
   than those enumerated in 
section 4(1)(b)
 and (c) of the Act), equal
   importance and emphasis are given to other public interests (like


                                        11

    confidentiality of sensitive information, fidelity and fiduciary relationships,
   efficient operation of governments, etc.). Indiscriminate and impractical
   demands or directions under 
RTI Act
 for disclosure of all and sundry
   information (unrelated to transparency and accountability in the
   functioning of public authorities and eradication of corruption) would be
   counter-productive as it will adversely affect the efficiency of the
   administration and result in the executive getting bogged down with the
   non- productive work of collecting and furnishing information. 
The
   Act
 should not be allowed to be misused or abused, to become a tool to
   obstruct the national development and integration, or to destroy the
   peace, tranquility and harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be
   converted into a tool of oppression or intimidation of honest officials
   striving to do their duty. The nation does not want a scenario where 75%
   of the staff of public authorities spends 75% of their time in collecting and
   furnishing information to applicants instead of discharging their regular
   duties. The threat of penalties under the 
RTI Act
 and the pressure of the
   authorities under the 
RTI Act
 should not lead to employees of a public
   authorities prioritising 'information furnishing', at the cost of their
   normal and regular duties."(Emphasis Supplied)......."



Nonetheless, the Commission further notes after closely scrutinizing the
contents of RTI Applications that replies have been provided by the CPIO in
response to indeterminate queries despite the fact that these are outside
the ambit of 
Section 2 (f)
 of RTI Act as also the factual position of non-
availability of records has also been intimated which was appropriate as the
said replies are found to be in consonance with the provisions of 
RTI Act
,
merits of which cannot be called into question.



For better understanding of the mandate of the 
RTI Act
, the
Appellant/Complainant shall note that outstretching the interpretation of 
Section
2(f)
 of the RTI Act to include deductions and inferences to be drawn by the CPIO is
unwarranted as it casts immense pressure on the CPIOs to ensure that they
provide the correct deduction/inference to avoid being subject to penal
provisions under the 
RTI Act
. For the sake of clarity, the provision of 
Section 2(f)

of the RTI Act is reproduced hereunder:

      "2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--

      (f) "information" means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any

                                        12

 electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;.."

In this regard, the Appellant's attention is drawn towards a judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court on the scope and ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act in the
matter of CBSE vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors.[CIVIL APPEAL NO.6454 of
2011]wherein it washeld as under:

 
"35. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some misconceptions about
the 
RTI Act
. 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and
existing.........A public authority is also not required to furnish information which
require drawing of inferences and/or making of assumptions. It is also not
required to provide `advice' or `opinion' to an applicant, nor required to obtain
and furnish any `opinion' or `advice' to an applicant. The reference to `opinion'
or `advice' in the definition of `information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers
to such material available in the records of the public authority. Many public
authorities have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and
opinion to the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused
with any obligation under the 
RTI Act
." (Emphasis Supplied)

Similarly, in the matter of 
Khanapuram Gandaiah vs Administrative Officer &Ors.
[SLP (CIVIL) NO.34868 OF
 2009], the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:




      "7....Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material which is
not before him; or any information he could have obtained under law.
Under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such information
which can be accessed by the "public authority" under any other law for the time
being in force. The answers sought by the petitioner in the application could not
have been with the public authority nor could he have had access to this
information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged to give any reasons as to
why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was before him...."

(Emphasis Supplied)

And, in the matter of 
Dr. Celsa Pinto, Ex-Officio Joint Secretary,(School
Education) vs. The Goa State Information Commission
 [2008 (110) Bom L R
1238], the Hon'ble Bombay High Court held as under:




      "..... In the first place, the Commission ought to have noticed that the Act
confers on the citizen the right to information. Information has been defined
by 
Section 2(f)
 as follows.

                                         13


 
Section 2(f)
 -Information means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;

      The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the question why
which would be the same thing as asking the reason for a justification for a
particular thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot expect to
communicate to the citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not done
in the sense of a justification because the citizen makes a requisition about
information. Justifications are matter within the domain of adjudicating
authorities and cannot properly be classified as information." (Emphasis
Supplied)

In addition to the above, it is also notable that the personal details of the
Secretary of NCCT & other employees of NCCT as sought by the Appellant
contains the data of personal information of third party, disclosure of which is hit
by 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act. The same can be garnered from a bare perusal of the
text of 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act as under:



      "....(j) information which relates to personal information the disclosure of
      which has no relationship to any public activity or interest, or which would
      cause unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual unless the
      Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer or
      the appellate authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that the larger
      public interest justifies the disclosure of such information;.."



In this regard, attention of the parties is invited towards a judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of Central Public Information
Officer, Supreme Court of 
India Vs. Subhash Chandra Agarwal
 in Civil Appeal No.
10044 of 2010 with Civil Appeal No. 10045 of 2010 and Civil Appeal No. 2683 of
2010 wherein the import of "personal information" envisaged under 
Section
8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act has been exemplified in the context of earlier ratios 
laid down by

the same Court in the matter(
s) of Canara Bank Vs. C.S. Shyam
 in Civil Appeal
No.22 of 2009; 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande vs. Central Information
Commissioner & Ors.
, (2013) 1 SCC 212 and R.K. Jain vs. Union of India & Anr.,
(2013) 14 SCC 794.The following was thus held:




       "59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion, would
       indicate that personal records, including name, address, physical, mental

                                         14

        and psychological status, marks obtained, grades and answer sheets,
       are all treated as personal information. Similarly, professional records,
       including qualification, performance, evaluation reports, ACRs,
       disciplinary proceedings, etc. are all personal information. Medical
       records, treatment, choice of medicine, list of hospitals and doctors
       visited, findings recorded, including that of the family members,
       information relating to assets, liabilities, income tax returns, details of
       investments, lending and borrowing, etc. are personal information. Such
       personal information is entitled to protection from unwarranted invasion
       of privacy and conditional access is available when stipulation of larger
       public interest is satisfied. This list is indicative and not exhaustive..."



Further, with regards to the issue flagged by the Appellant challenging the
veracity of information furnished by the CPIO is purely a matter of grievance
which is outside the mandate of 
RTI Act
. Here, he is advised about the powers of
the Commission under the 
RTI Act
 by relying on certain precedents of the superior
Courts as under:



The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of 
Hansi Rawat and Anr. v. Punjab
National Bank and Ors. (LPA No.785/2012
) dated 11.01.2013 has held as under:




 
"6. ....proceedings under the 
RTI Act
 cannot be converted into
     proceedings for adjudication of disputes as to the correctness of the
     information furnished."(Emphasis Supplied)

The aforesaid rationale finds resonance in another judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi
High Court in the matter of 
Govt. of NCT of Delhi vs. Rajender Prasad (W.P.[C
]
10676/2016) dated 30.11.2017 wherein it was held as under:




      "6. The CIC has been constituted under 
Section 12
 of the Act and the powers
      of CIC are delineated under the Act. The CIC being a statutory body has to
      act strictly within the confines of the Act and is neither required to nor has
      the jurisdiction to examine any other controversy or disputes."



While, the Apex Court in the matter of 
Union of India vs Namit Sharma (Review
Petition [C] No.2309
 of 2012) dated 03.09.2013 observed as under: 0

      "20. ...While deciding whether a citizen should or should not get a particular
      information "which is held by or under the control of any public authority",


                                         15

       the Information Commission does not decide a dispute between two or
      more parties concerning their legal rights other than their right to get
      information in possession of a public authority...." (Emphasis Supplied)

The Appellant is therefore, advised to exercise his right to information in an
informed and judicious manner in the future.




In view of the above, no scope for action lies in the matter.



Notwithstanding the aforesaid, the CPIO is advised to be more cautious in denying
information by quoting the appropriate clause of the 
RTI Act
 while responding to
the RTI Applications in future.



Lastly, in pursuance to clause 4 of hearing notice, the CPIO is directed to share a
copy of his latest written submissions free of cost with the Appellant immediately
upon receipt of this order under due intimation to the Commission.



                    The appeal (s) are disposed of accordingly.



                                                    Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                           हािन)
                                          Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )

Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स%यािपत ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                         16