[Cites 
20
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Ram Gopal vs Chief Commissioner Of Service Tax, New ... on 5 October, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                            बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/CCSTD/A/2023/117714

RAM GOPAL                                      ......अपीलकता /Appellant

                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम

CPIO,
O/O Asst. Commissioner, Central Goods &
Service Tax,
Plot No.36-37, Sector - 32,
Gurugram-122001.                  .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                   :   27/09/2023
Date of Decision                  :   27/09/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on          :   06/12/2022
CPIO replied on                   :   21/12/2023
First appeal filed on             :   06/01/2023
First Appellate Authority order   :   02/02/2023
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated        :   11/04/2023


Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 06.12.2022 seeking the following
information:



                                        1


 "A Summon under 
Section 70
 of the CGST Act, 2017 has been issued under CBIC-
DIN-20221252200000777F89 in name of our company M/s Beri Udyog Private
Limited by the Superintendent (AE), CGST, Panchkula. In the summons, in addition
to supply of various records, we are further required to reverse the ITC availed on
the invoices issued by M/s Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited having
GSTIN 06AAFCM1980K1Z9 as the said firm has not paid GST liability by filling
GSTR-3B returns. The copy of Summon is enclosed.



On the GST portal, the Administrative Office of above supplier is showing as
Jurisdiction-Centre. Range-4, Division North-1, Commissionerate - Gurugram. As
per Search Taxpayer details of above supplier downloaded from GST portal, M/s
Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited had filed GSTR-38 returns up to
the month of July, 2019 and had filed GSTR-1 rectums up to month of January,
2021 The effective date of GST registration of the supplier is showing as
22/09/2018 and this registration stand cancelled Suo-moto (effective from
29/01/2021) as per this search details. The print-out of search details of M/s
Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited is enclosed.



Our company had received various taxable supplies of services during the period
01/11/2018 to 31/07/2019 involving total CGST of Rs 16,36,768.00 & total SGST of
Rs 46,13,161.00 & total SGST of Rs. 46,13,161.00 from the above supplier namely
M/s Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited. Our company had duly paid
the service charges along with CGST & SGST amount to the above supplier though
banking channels in respect of invoices of services issued by the above service
provider.



Since M/s Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited had made taxable
supplies of services to our company and had charged CGST & SGST on their
invoices from our company, they were required to deposit the same with GST
department. There is a proper mechanism under GST Act for recovery of such tax
amount from the defaulter like 
Section 79
 of CGST Act, 2017 / 
Haryana Goods and
Service Tax Act, 2017
.



In the above explained facts, the undersigned request herewith to supply following
information and documents as per the provisions of 
Section 6
 ibid.



      a) Whether M/s Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited had paid/
      deposited GST liability of CGST of Rs.16,36,768.00 & SGST of Rs.

      Rs.16,36,768.00 in respect of taxable supplies of services made during the

                                        2

 period 01/11/2018 to 31/07/2019 to our company namely M/s Beri Udyog
Private Limited having GSTIN: 06AAACB5379C1ZX in view of submission of
GSTR 3B for the said period?



b) Whether M/s Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited had paid/
deposited GST liability of CGST of Rs. 46,13,161.00 & SGST of Rs.
46,13,161.00 in respect of taxable supplies of services made during the
period 01/08/2019 to 31/03/2021 to our company namely M/s Beri Udyog
Private Limited having GSTIN: 06AAACB5379C1ZX?



c) Whether any GST recovery proceeding has been initiated against M/s
Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited, NM-22, Old DLF, Sector-
14, Gurugram, Haryana - 122001 having GSTIN: 06AAFCM1980K1Z9, in
respect of various taxable supplies made by this party during the period
01/11/2018 to 31/03/2021, in case of non-payment of any GST liability for
this period (including the GST liabilities in respect of supplies of services
made during the period 01/11/2018 to 31/03/2021 involving total CGST
amount of Rs. 62,49,929.00 & total SGST amount of Rs. 62,49,929.00 to M/s
Beri Udyog Private Limited having GSTIN: 06AAACB5379C1ZX)?



d) Whether the whole of GST liability in respect of supplies made by M/s
Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited during the months of
November-2018 to March-2021 has been recovered from M/s Mechbulls
Management Services Private Limited, NM-22, Old DLF, Sector-14,
Gurugram, Haryana - 122001 having GSTIN: 06AAFCM1980K1Z9? However,
if only part amount of GST liability has been recovered from this party by
the GST department for these months, it is requested to inform the month-
wise details of GST liabilities of November-2018 to March-2021 of this
supplier and the figure of part GST liability amount recovered out of these
month-wise details of GST liability figures for the period November-2018 to
March-2021.



e) However, if either part or no recovery of GST liability has been made
from M/s Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited having GSTIN:

06AAFCM1980K1Z9 in respect of supplies made during the period
November-2018 to March-2021, it is requested to inform the action
initiated/taken so far for making GST recovery from this supplier. It is
further requested to supply copies of such action taken reports."



                                  3


 The CPIO furnished a reply to the appellant on 21.12.2022 stating as under:



      "The information sought by the applicant is a third-party information. Henc,
      the information cannot be disclosed under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act,
      2005."

Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 06.01.2023. FAA's
order, dated 02.02.2023, upheld the reply of the CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the denial of information by the CPIO, the
appellant approached the Commission with the instant Second Appeal on the
following grounds -



       ".... in the impugned order, the above information/documents required under RTI
application was denied on the illogical grounds that the information sought under RTI by
the appellant is private and held in fiduciary capacity by GST department and hence
exempted under 
Section 8(1)(e)
 & (j) of the 
RTI Act
. ln support of above, reliance has
been placed on para 59 of judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court passed in the case of
Subhash Chandra Agarwal, which has defined personal information. The Hon'ble first
appellate authority has further held that the appellant in the instant case has not made
a bona fide public interest in seeking information, the disclosure of such information
would cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of the individual under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of
the RTI Act, 2005.



2.2. ln this regard, it is submitted that 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the Right to lnformation Act,
2005 grant exemption from disclosure of information relating to third party in case
where such lnformation relates to personal information the disclosure of which has no
relationship to any public activity or interest, or which would cause unwarranted
invasion of the privacy of the individual. The relied upon 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of RTI Act 2005
provides that - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there shall be no
obligation to give any citizen,-



      "information which relates to personal information the disclosure of which has
      not relationship to any public activity or interest, or which would cause
      unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual unless the Central Public to
      lnformation Officer or the State Public lnformation Officer or the appellate
      authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that the larger public interest justifies
      the disclosure of such information:



Provided that the information, which cannot be denied to the Parliament or a State
Legislature shall not be denied to any person."

                                            4


 ln common language we would ascribe the adjective 'personal' to an attribute which
applies to an individual and not to an institution or a corporate company. The expression
"personal information" as used in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the Act has to be read in
the context of information relating to an individual. A plain reading of the aforesaid
clause would indicate that the expression "personal information" is linked with "invasion
of privacy of the individual". The use of the word "the" before the word "individual"
immediately links the same with the expression "personal information". Black's law
dictionary, sixth edition, inter alia, defines the word "personal" as under:-



       "The word "personal" means appertaining to the person; belonging to an
       individual; limited to the person; having the nature or partaking of the qualities of
       human beings, or of movable property."



A perusal of the above definition also indicates that the ordinary usage of the word
"personal" is in the context of an individual human being and not a corporate
entity/company. From this it flows that 'personal' cannot be related to institutions,
organizations, companies or corporates. The expression "individual" cannot be used as a
synonym for the expression "person". 
Under the General Clauses Act, 1897
 a person is
defined to "include any company or association or body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not'. Thus, whereas a 'person' would include an individual as well as
incorporated entities and artificial persons, the expression 'individual' cannot be
interpreted to include such entities. The context in which, the expression "personal
information" is used would also exclude it application to large widely held Lt
corporations. Hence, we could state that 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act cannot be applied
when the information concerns institutions, organizations, companies or corporates. ln
the impugned order, reliance has been made on para 59 of judgment of Hon'ble
Supreme Court passed in the case of Subhash Chandra Agarwal, which has defined
personal information. As per this para, personal information means personal records,
including name, address, physical, mental and psychological status, marks obtained,
grades and answer sheets. Similarly, professional records, including qualification,
performance, evaluation reports, ACRs, disciplinary proceedings, etc. are all personal
information. Medical records, treatment, choice of medicine, list of hospitals and doctors
visited, findings recorded, including that of the family members, information relating to
assets, liabilities, income tax returns, details of investments, lending and borrowing, etc.
are personal information. Such personal information is entitled to protection from
unwarranted invasion of privacy and conditional access is available when stipulation of
larger public interest is satisfied. Thus, the above relied upon para 59 of judgment of
Hon'ble Supreme Court also defines personal information relating to an individual.



2.3. ln the present case, the appellant is not seeking any personal information relating to
an individual or director of the supplies company. He is asking for providing


                                             5

 information/documents relating to GST payment made by M/s Mechbulls Management
Services Private Limited and relating to recovery proceedings initiated by GST authorities
against this supplier's company in respect of GST payable on supplies made to M/s Beri
Udyog Private Limited. The information sought has direct relation and making direct
impact on the appellant's company M/s Beri Udyog private Limited. By supplying the
required information/documents, it is not going to make any invasion of privacy of any
of director of M/s Mechbulls Management services private or of an individual. Thus, the
above ground raised in the impugned order for denial of information /documents to the
appellant is misconceived and based on wrong interpretation of provisions providing
exemption from disclosure of information under 
RTI Act
.



2.4. With respect to ground that information sought under RTI by the appellant is held in
fiduciary capacity by GST department and hence exempted under 
Section 8(1)(e)
 of the
RTI Act, it is submitted that the term 'fiduciary' refers to a person having a duty to act for
the benefit of another, showing good faith and condour, where such other person
reposes trust and special confidence in the person owing or discharging the duty. The
term 'fiduciary relationship' is used to describe a situation or transaction where one
person (beneficiary) places complete confidence in another person (fiduciary) in regard
to his affairs, business or transaction/s. The term also refers to a person who holds a
thing in trust for another (beneficiary). The fiduciary is expected to act in confidence and
for the benefit and advantage of the beneficiary, and use good faith and fairness in
dealing with the beneficiary or the things belonging to the beneficiary. lf the beneficiary
has entrusted anything to the fiduciary, to hold the thing in trust or to execute certain
acts in regard to or with reference to the entrusted thing, the fiduciary has to act in
confidence and expected not to disclose the thing or information to any third party.
There are also certain relationships where both the parties have to act in a fiduciary
capacity treating the other as the beneficiary. Examples of these are : a partner vis-à-vis
another partner and an employer vis-A-vis employee. An employee who comes into
possession of business or trade secrets or confidential information relating to the
employer in the course of his employment, is expected to act as a fiduciary and cannot
disclose it to others. similarly, if on the request of the employer or official superior or the
head of a department, an employee furnishes his personal details and information, to be
retained in confidence, the employer, the official superior or departmental head is
expected to hold such personal information in confidence as a fiduciary, to be made use
of or disclosed only if the employee's conducl or acts are found to be prejudicial to the
employer.



       ln the present case, the information relating to payment of GST liabilities by M/s
Mechbulls Management Services Private is not information held in fiduciary capacity by
GST department. Infact, anyone can check the GST payment & returns compliances on
part of a GST registered assessee on government GST portal (gst.gov.in) under "Search
Taxpayer" category. The purpose behind insertion of column 'Search Taxpayer" on GST


                                              6

 portal is to provide access to taxpayers to check and ensure GST compliances made by a
supplier before starting business dealings or during business dealings with such supplier
of goods or services.



       It is pertinent to mention here that the fact of part payment of GST liability by the
above supplier company M/s Mechbulls Management Services Private is already on
record of GST authorities and also specifically informed/disclosed to the appellant by
way of issuing summon to appellant's company M/s Beri Udyog Private Limited requiring
them to reverse the ITC availed on the invoices issued by M/s Mechbulls Management
Services Private Limited on the alleged ground that the said supplier company has not
paid GST liability. Here a question arises, if information relating to status of GST
payment made by M/s Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited is held in
fiduciary capacity by GST department, then why in the Summons dated 02.12.2022 it
has Deen disclosed to the appellant by informing that M/s Mechbulls Management
Services Private Limited has not paid GST liability. So, there is no fiduciary relationship
between a registered assessee and the GST department under provisions of GST Act.



       Moreover, the information required by the appellant is directly related to them
and the GST department is bound to disclose the same to the appellant before initiating
the any recovery proceedings against his company for reversal of ITC claimed on the
basis of tax invoices issued by M/s Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited.
Unless M/s Beri Udyog Private Limited is informed about how much GST liability has
been short paid by M/s Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited, it is not
understood how recovery proceedings for denial of ITC can be initiated against
appellant's company. There cannot be any justification for denying this information to
the appellant as the CGST department is requiring the appellant's company M/s Beri
Udyog Private Limited to reverse the ITC availed on the invoices issued by M/s Mechbulls
Management Services Private Limited.



       ln his RTI application, the appellant has only requested for supplying details of
GST payments already made by this supplier company in respect of taxable supplies
made to his company during the period 01/11/2018 to 31/03/2021 and for supplying
copies of recovery notices issued/action taken, if any against the above supplier for
recovery of pending GST liability against the supplies made to various parties including
to M/s Beri Udyog Private Limited, since any recovery of pending GST liability will have
direct impact on eligibility of ITC to the appellant's company M/s Beri Udyog Private
Limited in respect of taxable supplies received from M/s Mechbulls Management
Services Private Limited. Thus, the above ground raised in the impugned order for denial
of information /documents to the appellant is also misconceived and based on wrong
interpretation of provisions providing exemption from disclosure of information under

RTI Act
.



                                             7


        ln view of above, the impugned order merits to be set aside and a suitable
direction may be issued to the concerned CPIO to supply the required information and
documents to the appellant.



3. lt is pertinent to mention here that the appellant is not asking questions to any of the
authority. He is only asking for supplying information/documents relating to GST
payment made by M/s Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited in respect of
supplies made to his company and relating to recovery proceedings initiated by GST
authorities against this supplier's company in respect of such supplies. The appellant is
neither asking for any information or document, which is not in the record or control of
the concerned public authority nor asking any authority to take an action, which is not
earlier taken or not in their records. The appellant is only asking for supplying copies of
recovery notices issued/actions taken, if either part or no GST liability has been paid by
M/s Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited having GSTIN: 06MFCM1980K1Z9
in respect of taxable supplies made during the period November-2018 to March-2021.
The appellant is not asking questions to the authority if no GST recovery proceeding has
been initiated so far against this supplier. ln view of above, the impugned order wrongly
denying the required information/documents is clearly bad in law as the grounds taken
for denial of information are totally misconceived and are legally not sustainable.



4. lt is not out of place to mention here that the disclosure of information under 
Section 3

of RTI Act is the rule and exemption from disclosure of information is only an exception,
which should be used judicially with proper reasoning by the Public lnformation
Officer..."



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present through video-conference.

Respondent: Represented by Dharam Singh Meena, Inspector present in person.



The Appellant reiterated the contents of instant Appeal as mentioned in the
preceding paragraphs. He further prayed the Commission to grant him relief of
information in order to defend his case against the SCN issued to him for alleged
non-payment of GST in lieu of charges which has already been paid to the M/s
Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited for the manpower services
availed by them which in turn defaulted in paying the CGST liability.



The CPIO facilitated a discussion regarding the dispute of GST transactions
committed vis-à-vis between the Appellant's Company and M/s Mechbulls
Management Services Private Limited. Since, the information sought by the

                                             8

 Appellant regarding the averred Company contains the elements of personal
information of the said third party Company which are hit by 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI
Act and also such records are kept by the Respondent organization under
fiduciary capacity and therefore, cannot be divulged in view of 
Section 8(1)(e)
 of
RTI Act.



Decision:



The Commission observes from a perusal of records and after scrutinizing the
contents of RTI Application that the information sought by the Appellant majorly
does not conform to 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act and also contains the elements of
personal information including personal details of M/s Mechbulls Management
Services Private Limited which is hit by 
Section 8 (1)(j)
 of RTI Act.



For better understanding the mandate of 
RTI Act
, the Appellant shall note that
outstretching the interpretation of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act to include
deductions and inferences to be drawn by the CPIO is unwarranted as it casts
immense pressure on the CPIOs to ensure that they provide the correct
deduction/inference to avoid being subject to penal provisions under the 
RTI Act
.



His attention is also drawn towards a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court on
the scope and ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act in the matter of 
CBSE vs. Aditya
Bandopadhyay & Ors
 [CIVIL APPEAL NO.6454 of 2011] wherein it was held as
under:


  "35. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some misconceptions about the 
RTI
  Act
. 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and
  existing.........A public authority is also not required to furnish information
  which require drawing of inferences and/or making of assumptions. It is also
  not required to provide `advice' or `opinion' to an applicant, nor required to
  obtain and furnish any `opinion' or `advice' to an applicant. The reference to
  `opinion' or `advice' in the definition of `information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act,
  only refers to such material available in the records of the public authority.

 
Many public authorities have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice,
  guidance and opinion to the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not
  be confused with any obligation under the 
RTI Act
." (Emphasis Supplied)
Furthermore, as regards the applicability of exemption clause of 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of
RTI Act, attention of the parties is invited towards a judgement of Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India in the matter of Central Public Information Officer,

                                          9

 Supreme Court of 
India Vs. Subhash Chandra Agarwal
 in Civil Appeal No. 10044
of 2010 with Civil Appeal No. 10045 of 2010 and Civil Appeal No. 2683 of 2010
wherein while explaining the import of "personal information" envisaged under

Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act has been exemplified in the context of earlier ratios 
laid
down by
 the same Court in the matter(
s) of Canara Bank Vs. C.S. Shyam
 in Civil
Appeal No.22 of 2009; 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande vs. Central Information
Commissioner & Ors.
, (2013) 1 SCC 212 and R.K. Jain vs. Union of India & Anr.,
(2013) 14 SCC 794.The following was thus held:




       "59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion, would
   indicate that personal records, including name, address, physical, mental and
   psychological status, marks obtained, grades and answer sheets, are all
   treated as personal information. Similarly, professional records, including
   qualification, performance, evaluation reports, ACRs, disciplinary proceedings,
   etc. are all personal information. Medical records, treatment, choice of
   medicine, list of hospitals and doctors visited, findings recorded, including that
   of the family members, information relating to assets, liabilities, income tax
   returns, details of investments, lending and borrowing, etc. are personal
   information. Such personal information is entitled to protection from
   unwarranted invasion of privacy and conditional access is available when
   stipulation of larger public interest is satisfied. This list is indicative and not
   exhaustive..." (Emphasis Supplied)

Nonetheless, the reply provided by the CPIO was in consonance with the
provisions of 
RTI Act
, merits of which cannot be called into question.



Notwithstanding the aforesaid, the issue raised by the Appellant regarding alleged
inadequacies committed by M/s Mechbulls Management Services Private Limited
in payment of GST amount, is purely a matter of grievance which is outside the
mandate of 
RTI Act
. 
In this regard, a reference may be had of a judgment of the
Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the matter of 
Govt. of NCT of Delhi vs. Rajender
Prasad (W.P.[C
] 10676/2016) dated 30.11.2017 wherein it was held as under:


        "6. The CIC has been constituted under 
Section 12
 of the Act and the powers
of CIC are delineated under the Act. The CIC being a statutory body has to act
strictly within the confines of the Act and is neither required to nor has the
jurisdiction to examine any other controversy or disputes."

While, the Apex Court in the matter of 
Union of India vs Namit Sharma (Review
Petition [C] No.2309
 of 2012) dated 03.09.2013 observed as under:


                                         10


       "20. ...While deciding whether a citizen should or should not get a particular
information "which is held by or under the control of any public authority", the
Information Commission does not decide a dispute between two or more parties
concerning their legal rights other than their right to get information in
possession of a public authority...." (Emphasis Supplied)

Having observed as above, no further relief can be granted in the matter.



However, the Commission empathizes with the concern of the Appellant and
advises him to pursue the matter through appropriate administrative
mechanisms.



                     The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                  Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                         हािन)
                                        Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स%यािपत ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                        11