[Cites 
30
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Samir Sardana vs Punjab National Bank on 5 November, 2021


Author: 
Suresh Chandra


Bench: 
Suresh Chandra


                                      के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                              Central Information Commission
                                   बाबा गंगनाथ माग ,मुिनरका
                               Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                                 नई  द ली, New Delhi - 110067

िशकायत सं या / Complaint Nos. CIC/PNBNK/C/2019/644072 and
CIC/PNBNK/C/2019/653119

Samir Sardana                                              ...िशकायतकता/Complainant

                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम

CPIO: Punjab National Bank,
New Delhi.                                                 ... ितवादीगण /Respondents

Relevant dates emerging from the complaint:

RTI : 28.04.2019/               FA : 27.06.2019/                Complaint : 27.06.2019/
03.08.2019                      06.10.2019                      06.10.2019
CPIO : No Reply                 FAO : No Order                  Hearing   : 28.09.2021


                                         CORAM:
                                   Hon'ble Commissioner
                                 SHRI SURESH CHANDRA
                                        ORDER

                                       (03.11.2021)


1.         The issues raised in both the complaints CIC/PNBNK/C/2019/644072 and
CIC/PNBNK/C/2019/653119 are identical, hence, it is felt desirable to pass a common
order in both the complaints.

1.1.       The issues under consideration i.e. the reliefs sought by the complainant in his
complaints dated 27.06.2019 and 06.10.2019 due to alleged non-supply of information
vide his RTI application dated 28.04.2019 are as under:-

     (i)      Impose maximum Penalty, on the PIO under 
Section 20(1)
, of the RTI
              Act,2005;

                                                                                    Page 1 of 29


      (ii)      Dismissal of the PIO (under the Ministry of Finance Rules and the Code of
               Conduct for Bank staff and other officers laid down by the Ministry of Finance)
               for illegal and mala fide action, and also under the Punjab National Bank
               Service Rules- which has several provisions for the same;

     (iii)     Administrative action and/strictures, against the PIO (under 
Section 20(2)
, of
               the RTI Act,2005, and also under the Punjab National Bank service rules which
               has several provisions for the same;

     (iv)      Recommendation to the Ministry of Finance for administrative action
               and/strictures, against the PIO;

     (v)       Direct the Respondents to refund the Application fee paid by Complainant
               while submitting RTI Application, as per section (7)(6) of the 
RTI Act
;

     (vi)      Invoke its powers under the 
RTI Act
 to issue any other direction or
               recommendation as it may deem appropriate;

     (vii) Direct the public authority to make entry in Service Book/Annual Performance
               Appraisal Report of the Respondents for defying the provisions of the Act
               (under the Punjab National Bank Service Rules- which has several provisions
               for the same);

     (viii) Compensate the complainant.

2.          Succinctly facts of the case are that the complainant filed an applications dated
28.04.2019 and 03.08.2019 under the 
Right to Information Act, 2005
 
(RTI Act
) before
the Central Public Information Officer (CPIO), Punjab National Bank, New Delhi,
seeking information which is reproduced as under:

"The following infomration was sought from the PIO, by the RTI applicant:

(i)         Wilful Defaulters
               • PIO to confirm that it can provide the photos of the wilful defaulters of
                  the bank




                                                                                     Page 2 of 29


 (ii)    NPA
          • PIO to provide the details of NPA, in excess of Rs 35 crores, as at
              December 31,2018, as under:

                 o Name of Borrower, Amount of O/s Loan, Location of Assets, Name of
                    Directors and Promoters of Borrower Entity and Name of Persons
                    who provided Personal Guarantees.

          • PIO to identify the NPA which had submitted testimonials, citations and
              recommendations from serving MP/MLAs and Constitutional Functionaries
              at the time of the loan sanction (in the last 7 years)

(iii)   NPA Analytics
          • PIO identify within the above NPA list, the NPA accounts wherein fraud has
              been identified by the banker (in the last 7 years),at any of the following
              stages :

                 o Loan Sanction
                 o Securities and Guarantees at the time of sanction of loan
                 o Asset Purchases and Usage by the Borrower
                 o Submission of SOA to Banker after purchase of assets
                 o Certifications by CAs/Surveyors etc.
                 o Falsification of accounts
                 o Diversion of funds from operations
                 o False representations for working capital limits and DP
          • If the PIO cannot identify the above said fraud cases, in the above said NPA
              list, but instead, it has a separate list of loan accounts, wherein fraud was
              identified (in the last 7 years) and which are also NPAs or Doubtful or loss
              accounts , the PIO can provide the said list as under:

                 o Name of Borrower, Amount of O/s Loan, Location of Assets, Name of
                    Directors and Promoters of Borrower Entity and Name of Persons
                    who provided Personal Guarantees
          • PIO to confirm that the banker had engaged any Forensic Auditor
              (irrespective of who paid the fees) or Directed the engagement of a forensic

                                                                                 Page 3 of 29

              auditor or instructed the borrower to engage a Forensic Auditor (in the last
             7 years) w.r.t its loan, NPA activities
                o If Yes, the date of the engagement and the name of the Forensic
                   Auditor
                o If Yes, the names of the NPA and/or sectors covered in the Forensic
                   Audit assignment
          • W.r.t. the loan accounts of the Bank, PIO to provide the details of the FIR
             and charge sheet filed in the last 7 years, w.r.t. the loan processes, activities
             and transactions as under:

                o Year of FIR, FIR No. Department (Crime Branch etc) and Station,
                   Name of Borrower, Name of Directors and Promoters of Borrower,
                   Names of Bank staff named in FIR
                o Year of Chargesheet, Chargesheet No., Department (Crime Branch
                   etc) and Station, Name of Borrower, Name of Directors and
                   Promoters of Borrower, Names of Bank staff named in Chargesheet
          • PIO to confirm that it has data w.r.t. credit facilities granted by the banker
             to borrowers whose manufacturing operations are within a proximity of
             300-500 kms of the manufacturing operations of the NPA of the same bank
             (for credits granted in the last 5 years)

(iv)   Loss, doubtful or written off loans
          • PIO to provide the details of Doubtful and Loss accounts, in excess of Rs 20
             crores, as at December 31, 2018, as under:

                o Name of Borrower, Amount of O/s Loan, Location of Assets, Name of
                   Directors and Promoters of Borrower Entity and Name of Persons
                   who provided Personal Guarantees
          • PIO to provide the details of Loan accounts wherein the Promoters are
             absconding, at December 31, 2018, as under:
                o Name of Borrower, Amount of O/s Loan, Location of Assets, Name of
                   Directors and Promoters of Borrower Entity and Name of Persons
                   who provided Personal Guarantees

                                                                                   Page 4 of 29

         • PIO to provide the details of Loan accounts wherein the Promoters are not
           traceable, at December 31, 2018, as under:

              o Name of Borrower, Amount of O/s Loan, Location of Assets, Name of
                   Directors and Promoters of Borrower Entity and Name of Persons
                   who provided Personal Guarantees
        • PIO to provide the details of the loans accounts written off by the bank from
           the Reserves or Capital Profits or Provisions or the Profit and Loss
           Account, as under :

              o Aggregate amount in the last 5 years (year by year)
              o Borrower name and amount for sums more than or equal to Rs 5
                   crores

(v)   Financing supply chain of banks
        • PIO to confirm if the Bank is allowed to finance the supply chain of its NPA
           borrowers - by fund or non fund based limits - on an ad hoc or regular basis
               o If Yes, the PIO to provide the aggregate amount of such financing o/s
                   as at December, 31, 2019
        • PIO to confirm if it actually finances the supply chain of its NPA borrowers

           - by fund or non fund based limits on an ad hoc or regular basis
               o If Yes, the PIO to provide the aggregate amount of such financing o/s
                   as at December, 31, 2019
        • PIO to confirm if the Bank is allowed to finance the supply chain of the NPA
           borrowers of other Banks - by fund or non fund based limits - on an ad hoc
           or regular basis
               o If Yes, the PIO to provide the aggregate amount of such financing o/s
                   as at December, 31, 2019
        • PIO to confirm if it actually finances the supply chain of the NPA borrowers
           of other Banks - by fund or non fund based limits - on an ad hoc or regular
           basis
               o If Yes, the PIO to provide the aggregate amount of such financing o/s
                   as at December, 31, 2019

                                                                              Page 5 of 29


  (vi)      CDR/OTS
              • PIO to provide the details of CDR/OTS done by the bank in the last 7 years,
                 as under:

                     o Year
                     o Name of Borrower (CDR/OTS Account)
                     o Amount of NPA
                     o Settlement taken by Sundry Creditors
              • PIO to identify within the above, the cases wherein the creditors have
                 acquired the NPA

(vii)      NPA Turnaround
              • PIO to confirm that it has data to identify the NPA who are operating as Job
                 workers or Contract Manufacturers (wherein 35-50% of the aggregate
                 production of the NPA is from Job work etc., or where 35-50% of the Gross
                 Margin is derived from Job Work)
              • PIO to confirm that the banker had engaged any consultant (irrespective of
                 who paid the consultant fees) or directed the engagement of a consultant or
                 instructed the borrower to engage a consultant to assess options to salvage,
                 turnaround, recover NPAs (in the last 7 years)
                     o If Yes, the date of the engagement and the name of the consultant
                     o If Yes, the names of the NPA and/or sectors covered in the Consultant
                        assignment
         • PIO to confirm the dates and location of the meetings held with other banks to
            make, discuss or execute a strategy to recover NPA (in the last 30 months) as
            under:

               o Name of Bankers and Dates of Meeting

(viii)     Ad-hoc Limits
         • Ad-hoc Fund Based and Non-Fund Based limits sanctioned by the banker to
            borrowers (in the last 7 years), wherein the banker was not the lead banker or
            consortium banker, as under:

               o Year of Sanction - Name of Borrower - Type of Limit

                                                                                   Page 6 of 29


 (ix)     FX
       • Loss incurred by the bank in the last 7 years on account of FX Derivatives
          Products, as under :

              o Unrecoverables on account of Counterparty default and Counterparty Risk
              o Losses due to market movements on open positions or limited hedge
                positions

(x)      Gifts, donations/DEA Fund and Commissions
       • Value of gifts and souvenirs provided by the bank, in the last 7 years, as under
              o To Ministers
              o To Politicians
              o To Other Constitutional Functionaries
              o To Bureaucrats
              o To Senior Management
              o To Other Persons
       • PIO to confirm the value of donations and grants made to charities, NGOs and
          other entities, individuals and organizations in the last 7 years, as under:

              o Year of said donation
              o Person to whom the said grant was made
       • PIO to provide the amount of Commission paid on Deposits secured by the
          banker in the last 7 years, as under :

              o Year and Amount
       • PIO to provide the amount of fund transferred to the RBI DEA Fund in the last 7
          years (year by year)

(xi)     Demo/GST
       • PIO to confirm if it has done any analysis in terms of a discussion report,
          analytics report, NPA recovery meeting to identify accounts that became NPA due
          to DEMO and GST
       • PIO to provide the amount of counterfeit currency deposited in the bank during
          the Demo drive of the GOI



                                                                                     Page 7 of 29

          • PIO to provide the aggregate amount of funds deposited in bank accounts opened
            upto 1 month before the Demo drive of the GOI
         • PIO to provide the aggregate amount of funds deposited in bank accounts opened
            upto 1 month after the Demo drive of the GOI
         • PIO to provide the aggregate amount of funds deposited in bank accounts
            designated as Jan Dhan and other accounts, for Economically Weak Sections of
            Society during the Demo drive of the GOI
         • PIO to provide the aggregate amount of funds deposited in bank accounts in
            Branches designated as Agri-Credit branches during the Demo drive of the GOI
         • PIO to provide the aggregate amount of funds deposited in bank accounts
            designated as Agriculturists/Farmers and Agri-Traders during the Demo drive of
            the GOI
         • PIO to provide the aggregate amount of funds deposited in bank accounts
            designated as for the Gems and Jewellery Sector during the Demo drive of the
            GOI

(xii)      Limitation and NPA Sales
     • PIO to provide the value and sector profile of the NPAs sold by the Bank, in the
           last 7 years, as under:

               o Year and Sector - and within the same, the following:

               o NPA Value
               o Sale Value
     • Provide the names of the borrowers and the amounts due w.r.t accounts where
           debtors/loan/credit recovery was barred by limitation (since 2010)
              o (If the information is available on the Bank website or other portal - PIO to
                  direct the RTI Applicant to the same)

(xiii)     Unclaimed Deposits and Lockers
     • The aggregate number of lockers wherein the account holders are dormant (as of
           December 31, 2018)
     • The aggregate number of lockers wherein the activity in the lockers is Nil for more
           than 10 years (as of December 31, 2018)

                                                                                   Page 8 of 29

       • The aggregate number of lockers wherein the activity in the lockers is Nil for more
         than 20 years (as of December 31, 2018)
      • PIO to provide the ageing schedule of all unclaimed deposits with the bank - in the
         aggregate (in the manner available with the bank) (as of December 31,2018)

(xiv)    EB
      • PIO to confirm that any 2nd Appeal or Complaint related to the Bank is pending
         with the CIC related to the beneficial owners and/or beneficiaries of the Electoral
         Bonds issued by the Bank"



         The CPIO did not give any reply. Dissatisfied with the same, the complainant filed
 first appeals dated 27.06.2019/ 06.10.2019. The complainant without waiting for the
 order of the FAA filed a complaint dated 27.06.2019/ 06.10.2019 before the Commission
 which is under consideration.



 3.      The complainant has filed the instant complaints dated 27.06.2019 and 06.10.2019
 inter alia on the grounds that no reply was given by the respondent in spite of several
 reminders, and the information sought was of vital importance of public interest in
 banking operations. The complainant requested the Commission to take necessary action
 as per 
Section 20 (1)
 of the RTI Act.



 4.      Perusal of the documents submitted by the complainant for filing the complaints
 dated 27.06.2019 and 06.10.2019 reveals that the CPIO and the FAA did not give any
 reply or information to the complainant.



 Hearing on 17.08.2021:



 4.1.    The complainant and on behalf of the respondent Shri Ashok Kumar Mishra,
 CPIO and Deputy General Manager and Shri Jaseem Siddiqui, Chief Manager(Law),
 Punjab National Bank, Delhi, attended the hearing through video conference.



 4.2.    The Commission passed the following directions on 31.08.2021:



         "6.   The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case,
         hearing both the parties and perusal of records, observed that no reply was given by


                                                                                   Page 9 of 29

        the respondent in response to the RTI applications dated 28.04.2019 and 03.08.2019
       so far in spite of almost two years having elapsed from the date of filing the RTI
       application. Further, perusal of the records including the dispatch details revealed
       that the hearing notice for the hearing of the instant complaint was dispatched on
       20.07.2021. However, the respondent made no efforts to obtain a copy of the RTI
       application from either the complainant, the web portal of the CIC or the Registry of
       this Bench. This reflects their casual and callous attitude towards both the 
RTI Act
 as
       well as the Commission. In view of the above, Shri Ashok Kumar Mishra, present
       CPIO and the then CPIO (as on 28.04.2019/03.08.2019) are show caused as to why
       penalty as per 
section 20 (1)
 of the RTI Act may not be imposed upon each of them for
       not responding to the RTI application within stipulated time. Shri Ashok Kumar
       Mishra is given the responsibility to serve a copy of this order upon the then CPIO
       and secure his written explanations as well as his attendance on the next date of
       hearing i.e. on 28.09.2021.     All written submissions must be uploaded on the
       Commission's web portal within 21 days. The matter is posted to 28.09.2021."



Hearing on 28.09.2021


5.     The complainant attended the hearing through video conference and on behalf of
the respondent Shri Ashok Kumar Mishra, Dy. General Manager & CPIO, Shri S.S.
Yadav, Retired Dy. General Manager, Shri Sudhir Sharma, Retd. Dy. General Manager,
Shri Jaseem Siddiqui, Chief Manager-Law, Shri Kunal Chauhan, Law Officer, Punjab
Nation Bank, New Delhi attended the hearing in person.



5.1.   The complainant inter alia submitted that the respondent had not responded to his
RTI application, hence, he filed the complaint after 75 days having elapsed.              The
complainant alleged that the CPIO of the respondent bank was a habitual offender and
his mala fide was reflected from the action of blocking his email id upon receipt of
several reminders sent by him to the CPIO. The complainant further submitted that the
respondent had not provided complete information and that all the categories mentioned
in the RTI application were not addressed by the respondent. The complainant further
contended that the information was sought in the interest of transparency, accountability


                                                                                  Page 10 of 29

 and larger public interest. Therefore, he requested that his complaint may be allowed in
terms of prayer. Moreover, his complaint may be converted and considered as second
appeal and the relief for providing the information may be granted. The complainant
further stated that he had also filed a first appeal before filing a complaint before the
Commission and as per the guidelines available in the web portal of the CIC, the
Commission may pass direction to the CPIO to provide the information while hearing a
complaint in case first appeal was also filed by the complainant.



5.2.   The respondent while defending their case inter alia submitted that he (the present
CPIO) had assumed responsibility as CPIO pursuant to realignment of RTI Cell with
Law Division with effect from 21.08.2019. The CPIO explained that the complainant had
filed RTI application dated 28.04.2019/03.08.2019 which was received at RTI Cell on
08.08.2019 but could not be replied as the same seemed to be displaced/lost during the
transit. The respondent tendered unconditional apologies for the delay caused in he
matter. However, there was no mala fide on their part and the complainant had not been
able to demonstrate the same. The respondent further submitted that they had provided
point-wise reply on 20.09.2021 and the same was reproduced as under:



       "Willful defaulters

       The query raised is not "information" under 
Right to Information Act, 2005
.



       NPA

       The Information sought pertains to records maintained by the bank in a fiduciary
       relationship and also relates to personal information the disclosure of which has
       no relationship to any public activity or interest, and it also cause unwarranted
       invasion of the privacy of the individual and appellant failed to establish that
       larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such information. Hence cannot
       provided under 
section 8(1)(e)
 of the Act & under 
section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act.



       No such information is on record.



                                                                                Page 11 of 29


 NPA Analytics

Information asked is not available in the record in the form and format it is asked
and RTI act does not require the CPIO to create information. Moreover
compilation of the same will divert the resources of the bank disproportionately.
Hence cannot provide under 
section 7(9)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.



The Information sought pertains to records maintained by the bank in a fiduciary
relationship and also relates to personal information the disclosure of which has
no relationship to any public activity or interest, and it also cause unwarranted
invasion of the privacy of the individual and appellant failed to establish that
larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such information. Hence cannot
provided under 
section 8(1)(e)
 of the Act & under 
section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act.



Services of Forensic Auditor is engaged from time to time in accounts as and when
required.



Information asked is not available in the record in the form and format it is asked
and RTI act does not require the CPIO to create information. Moreover
compilation of the same will divert the resources of the bank disproportionately.
Hence cannot provide under 
section 7(9)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005

Loss, Doubtful or Written Off Loans

The Information sought pertains to records maintained by the bank in a fiduciary
relationship and also relates to personal information the disclosure of which has
no relationship to any public activity or interest, and it also cause unwarranted
invasion of the privacy of the individual and appellant failed to establish that
larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such information. Hence cannot
provided under 
section 8(1)(e)
 of the Act & under 
section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act.



Desire information is available in Public Domain at our website www.pnbindia.in
and can be accessed through link https://www.pnbindia.in/annual-reportsl.html



                                                                         Page 12 of 29

 The Information sought pertains to records maintained by the bank in a fiduciary
relationship and also relates to personal information the disclosure of which has
no relationship to any public activity or interest, and it also cause unwarranted
invasion of the privacy of the individual and appellant failed to establish that
larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such information. Hence cannot
provided under 
section 8(1)(e)
 of the Act & under 
section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act.



Financing Supply Chain of Banks

No such data maintained and RTI act does not require the CPIO to create
information plus the Information sought pertains to records maintained by the
bank in a fiduciary relationship and also relates to personal information the
disclosure of which has no relationship to any public activity or interest, and it
also cause unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual and appellant
failed to establish that larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such
information. Hence cannot provided under 
section 8(1)(e)
 of the Act & under

section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act.



The query raised is not "information" under 
Right to Information Act, 2005
.



The query raised is not "information" under 
Right to Information Act, 2005
.



Adhoc Limits

Information asked is not available in the record in the form and format it is asked
and RTI act does not require the CPIO to create information. Moreover
compilation of the same will divert the resources of the bank disproportionately.
Hence cannot provide under 
section 7(9)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.



FX

There are no Un recoverable pertaining to FX derivative products on account of
counterparty default and counterparty risk in last 7 years.



                                                                         Page 13 of 29


 For merchant deals, no open position is held. So there are no loss on transactions
related to FX derivatives in last 7 years done on behalf of customers.



For Trading deals - Proprietary trading in FX derivatives are done as per the
approved policy of the bank with appropriate risk management limits.



Gifts, Donations/DEA Fund and Commissions

The query raised is not "information" under Right to Information act, 2005.



The query raised is not "information" under Right to Information act, 2005 plus
information asked is not available in the record in the form and format it is asked
and RTI act does not require the CPIO to create information. Moreover
compilation of the same will divert the resources of the bank disproportionately.
Hence cannot provide under 
section 7(9)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.



CDR/OTS

The Information sought pertains to records maintained by the bank in a fiduciary
relationship and also relates to personal information the disclosure of which has
no relationship to any public activity or interest, and it also cause unwarranted
invasion of the privacy of the individual and appellant failed to establish that
larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such information. Hence cannot
provided under 
section 8(1)(e)
 of the Act & under 
section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act.



NPA Turnaround

The data is not maintained by the bank and RTI act does not require the CPIO to
create information.



Services of consultants/ Recovery agency are engaged form time to time in
accounts as and when required.         As to other information sought it is the
information which relates to personal information the disclosure of which has no
relationship to any public activity or interest and it also cause unwarranted
invasion of the privacy of the individual and appellant failed to establish that


                                                                         Page 14 of 29

      larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such information. Hence cannot
     provided under 
section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act

     Demo/GST

     The query raised is not "information" under Right to Information act, 2005

     Information asked is not available in the record in the form and format it is asked
     and RTI act does not require the CPIO to create information. Moreover
     compilation of the same will divert the resources of the bank disproportionately.
     Hence cannot provide under 
section 7(9)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.



     Limitation and NPA Sales

     NPA sale Data provided in tabular form mentioning bank, year, NPA value & Sale
     value.



     The Information sought pertains to records maintained by the bank in a fiduciary
     relationship and also relates to personal information the disclosure of which has
     no relationship to any public activity or interest, and it also cause unwarranted
     invasion of the privacy of the individual and appellant failed to establish that
     larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such information. Hence cannot
     provided under 
section 8(1)(e)
 of the Act & under 
section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act.



     Unclaimed Deposits and Lockers

     Information asked is not available in the record in the form and format it is asked
     and RTI act does not require the CPIO to create information. Moreover
     compilation of the same will divert the resources of the bank disproportionately.
     Hence cannot provide under 
section 7(9)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.



     The query raised is not "information" under Right to Information act, 2005."



6.   The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case, hearing
both the parties and perusal of records, observed the respondent replied to the RTI



                                                                              Page 15 of 29

 application dated 28.04.2019/03.08.2019 on 20.09.2019.              Before dwelling upon the
complaint some of the relevant cases may be discussed.

6.1.   
In 
Mr. K.S. Vasudevan vs Ministry of Law and Justice [CIC/SS/A/2011/000828
],
the appellant filed RTI application dated 04.09.2010 seeking the following information:


       "1(a) Whether it is mandatory and compulsory to continue the proceedings initiated by
       the Department when the criminal case is pending before any court of law against those
       officers;

       1(b) Whether the judgments cited are binding on the Department or not;
       2(i) If yes, then whether instructions have been issued by the Law Ministry to other
       Departments for keeping such cases in abeyance or not; and
       2(ii) If not please cite the rules under which the Departmental proceedings can be
       conducted over-riding the above judgments."

The Commission while disposing of the second appeal vide its decision dated 09.09.2011
made the following observations:

 
"4. After hearing the respondent and on perusal of relevant documents, the Commission
       observes that the appellant sought legal opinion from respondent; the same is not
       covered within the ambit of the definition of 'information' as 
laid down in
 
Section 2(f)
 of
       the RTI Act. The Commission finds no reason to disagree with the replies of
       respondent."


6.2.   
In     
Sarojini     Devi     vs     Life     Insurance      Corporation       of     India
[CIC/LICOI/A/2017/1769933-BJ
], the appellant filed an RTI application dated
21.08.2017 seeking information on 05 points regarding the modified policy and practice
of LIC in view of the Supreme Court Judgment which had held in 2014 that no
Government Department/ Government Corporation will apply 
Public Premises Act (PP
Act
) to protected tenants who were in possession of the premises before 1958, list of
cases under trial by LIC Estate Officer under 
PP Act
 which had been
discharged/cancelled by LIC and premises returned to rightful protected tenant in light of
the above mentioned Supreme Court Judgment, etc.
 The Commission vide its decision
dated 05.04.2019 while disposing of the second appeal and while relying upon the
judgment of the Supreme Court in Khanapuram Gandaiah Vs. Administrative Officer



                                                                                      Page 16 of 29

 and Ors. Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.34868 OF 2009 (decided on January 4, 2010)
made the following observations.



       6. "....
Under the RTI Act
 "information" is defined under 
Section 2(f)
 which provides:

       "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-
       mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, report,
       papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and information
       relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other
       law for the time being in force."



       This definition shows that an applicant under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act can get any
       information which is already in existence and accessible to the public authority under
       law. Of course, under the 
RTI Act
 an applicant is entitled to get copy of the opinions,
       advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he cannot ask for any information as to why such
       opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc. have been passed."

       7. "....the Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material which is not
       before him; or any information he could have obtained under law. Under 
Section 6
 of the
       RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such information which can be accessed by
       the "public authority" under any other law for the time being in force. The answers
       sought by the petitioner in the application could not have been with the public authority
       nor could he have had access to this information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged
       to give any reasons as to why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was
       before him."



       The Appellant was not present to contest the submissions of the Respondent or to
       establish the larger public interest in disclosure which outweighs the harm to the
       protected interests.



       DECISION:



       Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by the Respondent, no
       further intervention of the Commission is required in the matter."



6.3.   
In 
Mr. B. Venkateswara Rao vs. CPIO, Andhra Bank [CIC/SG/A/2012/001449
],
the RTI appellant filed an application dated 04.11.2011 seeking the following
information:




       "1.Does it not expedient for the bank authorities concerned to verify and ensure that
       everything is in the points after the customer leaves the locker room?



       2. In the period 1-10-11 to 28-10-2011 no efforts to have been evinced to notice the fact
       of tempering of the locker. Can the reasons for this lapse on the part of the concerned
       authorities be permissible as per bank's statutory rules?



                                                                                    Page 17 of 29


        3. Does it not require causing an immaculate intensive check of all the locking devices
       and ensuring safety in a foolproof manner by the Banking officials concerned just before
       they leave precincts of the Bank each day?



       4. Are there any specific rules allowing the bank authorities to engage an unauthorized
       mechanic for the purpose?



       5. Had there been strict surveillance of the bank officials concern throughout the
       operation or this repaired word?



       6. Are there any rules under Bank's Statute to allow a private person in the locker room
       without the surveillance of the bank officials?"



The Commission while disposing of the appeal passed the following directions vide its
decision dated 27.06.2012:



       "The Appeal is partially allowed. The PIO is directed to provide an attested copy of the
       Manual/Rules as directed above to the Appellant before 15 July 2012."



6.4.   In Shri Fasih Akhtar vs. CPIO, Prime Minister's Office [CIC/CC/A/2015/002259],
the appellant filed an RTI application dated 07.10.2014 seeking information on four
points:



       "(i) date of receipt of letter which was sent to the Prime Minister's Office;



       (ii) what action has been taken by the PMO on his representation dt. 8-9-2014 relating
       to prohibition of cow slaughtering;



       (iii) what is the reason why the Prime Minister did not convey congratulations on the
       occasion of Eid Day to the Muslim community; and


       (iv) it is against the Constitutional Rights that on the occasion of Hindu festivals Prime
       Minister conveys congratulations but on the festive occasion of Muslim he does not."



The Commission while disposing of the appeal while disposing of the appeal vide its
decision dated 30.08.2016 held:



       "The Commission's intervention is not required in the matter. The appeal is disposed of"



                                                                                       Page 18 of 29


 6.5.    
In 
Govind Mittal vs. CPIO, National Highway Authority of India, Faridabad
[CIC/SS/A/2012/003439
] the appellant filed an RTI application dated 16.07.2010
seeking information on 3 points:




        "(1) provide information that on how much distance should heconstruct the boundary of
        his HouseKothi No: 69 which is situated at Gandhi
        Nagar, Agra, U.P near to Highway no: 2 because at present he permission to
        construct boundary of his house at 82 feet away from the main Road of the
        Highway no. 2 from NHAI.



        (2) At what rate compensation will be given for the acquired land by the NHAI?



        (3) Provide information on what distance should he
        construct the main building of his House?"



The Commission while disposing of the appeal passed the following decision dated
29.08.2013:



        "The Commission observes that the queries raised by the appellant in his
        RTI application are more in the nature of seeking advice and clarification whereas under

        the provisions of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 only information as is held by the Respondent in
        material form can be provided. The Respondent are not expected to create information
        or to give advise. The information sought by the Appellant therefore does not qualify as
        information as defined under 
section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005."



6.6.    In     Kothandaraman         Venkataraman         vs.    CPIO,       Bank    of    India
[CIC/BKOIN/A/2017/166537], the appellant filed RTI application dated 17.07.2017
seeking the following information:



       (i)     "Confirmation from telephone service provider for messages delivered from this
              ATM-TCE9038/ triggered by this ATM for my attempted withdrawal transaction no.

              348748 on 8.9.16 and any other sms sent to my phone by your service provider for
              this transaction the same day.

       (ii)   name of telephone service provider for cross verification print out.



                                                                                     Page 19 of 29


        (iii)     Appellant want the calibrated maximum delivery in Rupees machine-TCE9038 can
                 deliver per withdrawal transaction, this when was last calibrated before 8.9.16 date
                 and value. It can be 15000 or 10000 only.

       (iv)      inspecting this record wherever it is recorded / registered must be in Chennai."



The Commission while disposing of the appeal passed the following decision dated
09.04.2019:



          "6.      The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case,
          hearing both the parties and perusal of records, feels that there is no danger to life of
          any individual as claimed by the respondent under 
section 8 (1) (g)
 of RTI Act            in
          providing information. The information may be supplied within 15 days from the date of
          issue of this order."



6.7.      
In      
Chayan      Ghosh     Chowdhury      vs.     CPIO,   Punjab     &     Sind    Bank
[CIC/PASBK/A/2019/123506
], the appellant filed RTI application seeking the following
information:


                  "Kindly provide the following information with respect to administrative control
                of Zonal Office, Bareilly:

   (i)          Number of employees, cadre wise& year-wise, who have been placed under
                Suspension, since 01.01.2013 to date of providing information.

   (ii)         Total remuneration, cadre-wise & year-wise, paid to suspended employees since
                01.01.2013 to date of providing information.

   (iii)        Certified copies of the rules relied by the bank for review of suspension between
                01.01.2013 to date of providing information.

   (iv)         Name & designation of officials who were members of the Review Committee for
                Suspension during the period 01.01.2013 to date of providing information."
The Commission while disposing of the appeal passed the following directions vide
order dated 20.09.2021:



          "The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case, hearing
          both the parties and perusal of records, observes that the reply given by the respondent
          was incomplete and requisite information in response to point nos. (iii) and (iv) of the
          RTI application had not been provided so far. The stipulated time for transferring the


                                                                                         Page 20 of 29

         RTI application to the concerned Branch having elapsed, it was the responsibility of the
        respondent to obtain the same and provide it to the appellant. Accordingly, the
        respondent is directed that information in respect to point nos. (iii) and (iv) of the RTI
        application be made available to the appellant along with uploading the same under
        
section 4 (1) (b)
 of the RTI Act on their web portal within three weeks from the date of
        receipt of this order. With these observations and directions, the appeal is disposed of."

6.8.    Definition of Information under 
RTI Act, 2005


"
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act defines 'Information' as any material in any form, including
records, documents, memos, email, opinion, contract report logbooks, samples, models
held in any electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force".



Further, 
Section 2 (i)
 defines the term "record" which includes:



   1. document, manuscript and file

   2. microfilm, microfiche and facsimile copy of a document

   3. reproduction of image or images embodied in such microfilm (whether enlarged or
        not); and

   4. other material produced by a computer or any other device


RTI Act
 provides that only such information is required to be supplied under the Act,
which already exists in material form and is held by the public authority or held under
the control of the public authority. According to the Act, the public information officer is
not to generate or interpret information, nor is he or she to solve problems raised by
applicants or to respond to hypothetical questions.



Further, the term "held by or under the control of public authority" in 
section 2(j)
 of RTI
Act has to be reads in a manner that it effectuates and is harmony with the term
"information" as defined in 
section 2(f)
.



6.8.1          The definition of "right to information" as given under 
section 2(j)
 in the

RTI Act
 is reproduced as under:



        "2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--

                                                                                       Page 21 of 29


               (a)....

              .

              .

              (j) "right to information" means the right to information accessible under this
              Act which is held by or under the control of any public authority and includes
              the right to--

                      (i) inspection of work, documents, records;

                      (ii) taking notes, extracts, or certified copies of documents or records;

                      (iii) taking certified samples of material;

                      (iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes, video
                      cassettes or in any other electronic mode or through printouts where
                      such information is stored in a computer or in any other device;"

6.8.2         In Institute of chartered accountant of 
India V. Shahunak H. Satya
 and
ors., [CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7571 of 2011] the Supreme Court laid down the following
observations:




        "26. We however agree that it is necessary to make distinction regarding
        information intended to bring transparency to improve accountability and to reduce
        corruption, falling under 
section 4(1)(b)
 and (c) and other information which may not
        have a bearing on accountability or reducing corruption. The competent authorities
        under the 
RTI Act
 will have to maintain a proper balance so that while achieving
        transparency, the demand for information does not reach unmanageable proportions
        affecting other public interests, which include efficient operation of public authorities
        and government, preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information and optimum
        use of limited fiscal resources."



6.8.3         In 
Central Board of Secondary Education & Anr. v. Aditya Bandopadhyay
& Ors.
 [2011 (8) SCALE 645] the Supreme Court laid down the following observations:




        "
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and existing. This is
        clear from a combined reading of 
section 3
 and the definitions of 'information' and
        'right to information' under clauses (f) and (j) of 
section 2
 of the Act. If a public
        authority has any information in the form of data or analysed data, or abstracts, or


                                                                                      Page 22 of 29

       statistics, an applicant may access such information, subject to the exemptions in 
section
      8
 of the Act. But where the information sought is not a part of the record of a public
      authority, and where such information is not required to be maintained under any law or
      the rules or regulations of the public authority, the Act does not cast an obligation upon
      the public authority, to collect or collate such non-available information and then
      furnish it to an applicant.



      .

      .

      "....A public authority is also not required to furnish information which require
      drawing of inferences and/or making of assumptions. It is also not required to
      provide 'advice' or 'opinion' to an applicant, nor required to obtain and furnish
      any 'opinion' or 'advice' to an applicant. The reference to 'opinion' or 'advice' in
      the definition of 'information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers to such
      material available in the records of the public authority......."



6.8.4 In Khanapuram Gandaiah V Administrative Officer & Ors. [S.L.P. (Civil) 34868
of 2009], the Supreme Court vide judgment dated 04.01.2010 laid down the following
observations:



      "This definition shows that an applicant under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act can get any
      information which is already in existence and accessible to the public authority under
      law. Of course, under the 
RTI Act
 an applicant is entitled to get copy of the opinions,
      advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he cannot ask for any information as to why such
      opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc. have been passed, especially in matters
      pertaining to judicial decisions. A judge speaks through his judgments or orders
      passed by him. If any party feels aggrieved by the order/judgment passed by a judge,
      the remedy available to such a party is either to challenge the same by way of appeal
      or by revision or any other legally permissible mode. No litigant can be allowed to
      seek information as to why and for what reasons the judge had come to a particular
      decision or conclusion. A judge is not bound to explain later on for what reasons he
      had come to such a conclusion."



                                                                                    Page 23 of 29


 
6.8.5 In case of 
A.K. Vasudev V. CPIO
, M/o Consumer Affairs, Food & Public
Distribution, New Delhi, it was held that respondent is seeking answers to his questions,
which does not fall within the definition of 'information' as per 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI
Act. The Commission refers to the decision of Hon'ble Bombay High Court at Goa in the
matter of Dr. Celsa Pinto V. Goa State Information Commission (W.P. No. 419 of
2007, decision dated 03.04.2008) wherein it was held as follows: "The definition of
information cannot include within its fold answers to the question "why" which would be
same thing as asking the reason for a justification for a particular thing. The public
information authorities cannot expect to communicate to the citizen the reason why a
certain thing was done or not done in the sense of a justification because the citizen
makes a requisition about information. Justification are matter within the domain of
adjudicating authorities and cannot properly be classified as information."




6.8.6        Right to information only to citizen of 
India

The Right to Information Act
 gives right to information only to citizen of India. It does
not make provision for giving information to companies, associations, corporations etc.
However, if an application is made by an employee of any corporation, association,
company, NGO indicating his name and such employee/officer bearer is a citizen of
India then 
in that case
 it would presume that a citizen has sought information and the
information may be supplied to him/her.




6.8.7 Information relating to any private body

The objective is to make public authority liable to make the information under their
custody accessible to the citizens and such obligation is not on the private bodies.
However, in case the information which as a mandatory filing or otherwise is available
with the public authorities being public record subject to exemptions is accessible under
RTI. Information relating to any private body although cannot be obtained directly but
can be obtained through a public authority if law allows public authority to access it
through mandatory filing or inspection etc. and thus become custodian.



                                                                              Page 24 of 29


 
6.8.8        In case of 
Poorna Prajna High School V. Central Information
Commission
 it was held that it is mandatory for public authorities to disseminate
information that is accessible to them. As a result, information that a public body has
access to is deemed information under 
Section 2(f)
 of the Right to Information Act,
2005. Here public authority is referred to as the framework or the body under which the
institution is governed.




6.8.9        In case of 
Reserve Bank of India V. Jayantilal Mistry
 the Court briefly
analysed 
section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, which defines information to include "...
information relating to any private body which can accessed by a public authority under
any other law for the time being in force." Using this inclusive definition, the Court
held that, even if a fiduciary relationship existed between the RBI and other banks,

section 2(f)
 would render them accessible to the public."




6.8.10       As per the RTI rules 2012, an application under sub-section (1) of 
Section 6

of the Act shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees ten and shall ordinarily not contain
more than five hundred words, excluding containing address of the Central Public
Information Officer and that of the applicant. However, the RTI application filed by the
complainant was having around 1800 words.



6.8.11       Perusal of the RTI application against which the complainant has filed
complaint reveals that he has sought details of Willful Defaulters, NPA Analytics, Loss,
doubtful or written off loans, Financial supply chain of banks, CRD/OTS, NPA
Turnaround, Adhoc limits, FX, Gifts, donations/DEA Fund and Commissions,
Demo/GST, Limitation and NPA Sales, Unclaimed Deposits and Lockers and EB.
Perusal further reveals that in most of the cases he has not sought any material or copy of
the order instead he has sought confirmation, analytics, details of processes etc. Thus he
has not sought records or documents which were in the custody of the public authority.



6.9          The position when a complaint is filed by the complainant and the same is
registered under 
Section 18
 of the RTI Act may be discussed in the first instance.



                                                                               Page 25 of 29


 6.9.1         During hearing the complainant raised the issue of converting complaint
into appeal and prayed for the information in terms of the guidelines available on the
CIC portal. Succinctly, the facts of the case on the subject are that earlier the field was
occupied by an order dated 21st September, 2017, the relevant para 1 of the order is re-
produced as under:



              "In a case of complaint(s) where the applicant seeks information
              and also requests for imposition of penalty on the CPIO, the
              complaint should be registered as Second Appeal, in case First
              Appeal was also filed by the applicant, as both reliefs sought by the
              applicant can be made available under 
Section 19
".

6.9.2         Subsequently, the order was amended vide order dated 14th June,2018. The
relevant portion of the order under the head Registration of Complaint is re-produced as
under:



              "During scrutiny of Complaint, if it is found that the Complainant
              has requested for the information along with the imposition of the
              penalty, the Complaint should be registered as Second Appeal,
              provided first appeal had been filed by the Complainant. However,
              if the first appeal has not been filed, the person concerned may be
              asked to file first appeal before filing second appeal."

6.9.3         The matter was discussed during the meeting held on 22nd May,2019
including the order of the CIC dated 14th June,2019. It was unanimously decided that
the same would be withdrawn. The order dated 27th May,2019 withdrawing the order
dated 14th June,2018 holds the field for the present.



6.9.4         It may be noted that while considering the issue as to whether the relief
under 
section 19
 of the Act maybe granted under 
section 18
 of the RTI Act or not, the
Commission in Sanjay Ramesh Shirodkar vs. Mumbai International Airport
Ltd.[CIC/MA/C/2008/000195] passed the following observations vide its order dated
18.05.2020:



        "6.   The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case,
        hearing both the parties and perusal of records, observes that the complainant had
        not filed second appeal aggrieved by non receipt of information/reply in response


                                                                                Page 26 of 29

         to his RTI application and first appeal before approaching this commission by way
        of complaint. Prima facie, it may not be unreasonable for MIAL to consider itself
        not covered within the meaning of public authority under the 
RTI Act
. Keeping in
        view of the above facts, it might not be proper for this Commission, on a
        complaint, where the relief sought had been punishment for not maintaining a list
        of CPIOs to punish without holding MIAL a 'public authority' or to treat
        complaint as second appeal. The ideal situation should have been that the
        complainant had exhausted available remedies i.e. First Appeal and/or Second
        Appeal. Having been not declared as 'public authority', MIAL might not be under
        an obligation to disclose the information requested for by the complainant nor
        maintain a list of CPIOs as mandated by the 
RTI Act
.



6.9.5         The Supreme Court in the case of 
Chief Information Commissioner and
Another Vs State of Manipur and Another
 [(2011) 15 Supreme Court Cases 1] has held :-




              "The only order which can be passed by the Information Commissioner
              under 
Section 18
 is an order of penalty provided under 
Section 20
.
              However, before such order is passed the Commissioner must be
              satisfied that the conduct of the Information Officer was not bona fide.
              The Commissioner while entertaining a complaint under 
Section 18
 has
              no jurisdiction to pass an order providing for access to the
              information.



              The appellant after having applied for information under 
Section 6
 and
              then not having received any reply thereto, it must be deemed that he
              has been refused the information. The remedy for such a person who
              has been refused the information is provided under 
Section 19
 of the
              Act."



6.10          The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the
case hearing both the parties and perusal of records, observes that the complainant
has filed complaint under 
Section 18
 of the RTI Act inter alia on the grounds that he


                                                                               Page 27 of 29

 had not received the information. However, the respondent had replied to the
complainant on 20.09.2021. Therefore, it was not a case of non-response on the part
of the respondent. Besides, the delay caused was on account of non-receipt of the
RTI application and therefore no mala fide is attributable to the CPIOs. He filed the
complaint without exhausting the remedy of filing second appeal. Further, in respect
of the show cause notice, the respondent submitted their written explanations. In
absence of any mala fide, there appears to be no ground for imposition of penalty on
the CPIOs and the delay caused in replying to the complainant is condoned.
Therefore, the show cause notices against Shri Ashok Kumar Mishra, present CPIO
and the then CPIO, are hereby dropped. In view of the factual as well as legal
discussions made above, the Commission does not find any substance in the
complaint. Hence the complaints are rejected.



      Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.



                                                                                    SD/-

                                                            (Suresh Chandra) (सुरेश चं ाा))
                                               Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
                                                               दनांक/Date: 03.11.2021

Authenticated true copy


R. Sitarama Murthy (आर. सीताराम मूत )
Dy. Registrar (उप पंजीयक)
011-26181927(०११-२६१८१९२७)
Addresses of the parties:

CPIO :

1. PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK
MANAGEMENT AUDIT & REVIEW DIVISION
(RIGHT TO INFORMATION CELL)
2ND FLOOR, EAST WING (A), PLOT NO. 4,
SECTOR - 10, DWARKA,
HO: NEW DELHI - 110 075

THE FIRST APPELLATE AUTHORITY,
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK,
MANAGEMENT AUDIT & REVIEW DIVISION
(RIGHT TO INFORMATION CELL)
2ND FLOOR, EAST WING (A),
PLOT NO. 4, SECTOR - 10, DWARKA,

                                                                               Page 28 of 29

 HO: NEW DELHI -110 075

CPIO : 1. SH. ASHOK KUMAR MISHRA
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK, MANAGEMENT
AUDIT & REVIEW DIVISION (RIGHT TO
INFORMATION CELL) 2ND FLOOR,
 EAST WING (A), PLOT NO. 4, SECTOR - 10,
DWARKA, HO: NEW DELHI - 110 075


2. SH. ASHOK KUMAR MISHRA (C.P.I.O)
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK, MANAGEMENT
AUDIT & REVIEW DIVISION (RIGHT TO
INFORMATION CELL) 2ND FLOOR, EAST
WING (A), PLOT NO. 4, SECTOR - 10,
DWARKA, HO: NEW DELHI - 110 075 (FOR
FORWARDING TO THE THEN C.P.I.O AS ON
(28-04-2019/03-08-2019)


SH. SAMIR SARDANA





                                           Page 29 of 29