[Cites 
21
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Naresh Kadyan vs National Biodiversity Authority on 20 January, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               के ीय सूचना आयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग, मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नईिद ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/NBDAT/C/2022/605621

Naresh Kadyan                                     ......िशकायतकता  /Complainant


                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम
CPIO,
National Biodiversity Authority, RTI Cell,
5th Floor, TICEL Bio Park, CSIR, Road,
Taramani, Chennai-600113,
Tamil Nadu.                                           .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                     :    18/01/2023
Date of Decision                    :    18/01/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :               Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from complaint:

RTI application filed on            :    12/11/2021
CPIO replied on                     :    09/12/2021
First appeal filed on               :    NIL
First Appellate Authority order     :    13/12/2021
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated          :    NIL

Information sought
:

The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 12.11.2021 seeking the
following information;



Animal Welfare Party: AWP, 1st Political Party in India, fighting hard for
animals, restoring their 5 freedoms, but adopted mechanism of Indian
Government, have contradiction and discriminations, as below, adopting
double standards:

 
Section 2
 of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002:



(c) Biological resources, means plants, animals and micro-organisms or parts
thereof, their genetic material and by-products (excluding value added
products) with actual or potential use or value, but does not include human
genetic material.

(f) Commercial utilization, means end uses of biological resources for
commercial utilisation such as drugs, industrial enzymes, food flavours,
fragrance, cosmetics, emulsifiers, oleoresins, colours, extracts and genes used
for improving crops and livestock through genetic intervention, but does not
include conventional breeding or traditional practices in use in any agriculture,
horticulture, poultry, dairy farming, animal husbandry or bee keeping.



Section 2
 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972:



(1) Animal, includes amphibians, birds, mammals and reptiles and their young,
and also includes, in the cases of birds and reptiles, their eggs. 
Section 2
 of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988:

(13). GOODS, includes live-stock, and anything (other than equipment ordinarily
used with the vehicle) carried by a vehicle except living persons, but does not
include luggage or personal effects carried in a motor car or in a trailer
attached to a motor car or the personal luggage of passengers travelling in the
vehicle.

(14). Goods carriage, means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use
solely for the carriage of goods, or any motor vehicle not so constructed or
adapted when used for the carriage of goods.



Whereas, these goods, as stated above, have five freedoms, even Supreme
Court order, dated 7.5.2014 in SLP (C) No.11686 of 2007, also confirmed, as per
section 54: Chapter 7.1.2 of the guidelines of OIE, recognizes five
internationally recognized freedoms for animals, such as:

(i) freedom from hunger, thirst and malnutrition.

(ii) freedom from fear and distress.

(iii) freedom from physical and thermal discomfort.

(iv) freedom from pain, injury and disease and

(v) freedom to express normal patterns of Behaviour, read with the 
section 3
 of
the PCA Act, 1960 and 
article 51
 A(g) of Indian Constitution.



Section 2
 of the PCA Act, 1960:



(a) Animal, means any living creature other than a human being.

 Supply with concerned file noting, relating to discrimination between animal
with goods:

1. List of complaints, lodged for restoration of 5 freedoms, in ZOOs, compliance
of court orders, including Zoos of 100 Smart Cities.

2. Goods may not have 5 freedoms, supply detailed activities of AWBI,
preventing abuse against goods, defined animals.

3. Goods, cannot be a living creatures, have pain and sufferings, supply
relevant records of NHAI, NTCA, WCCB, PE, NBA with AWBI and CZA.

4. Fundamental duties, never allowed animals as goods, supply details
attached

The CPIO furnished a reply to the complainant on 09.12.2021 stating as under;



   With reference to your RTI application requesting details on the
   discrimination between animal with goods, it is informed that there is no
   such records or information is available with the National Biodiversity
   Authority (NBA). The NBA is regulatory, statutory body for implementing
   the provisions of the 
Biological Diversity Act, 2002
. It regulates access to
   biological resources under 
section 3
,
4
,
6
 and 
20
 of the Biological Diversity
   Act, 2002.



Being dissatisfied, the complainant filed a First Appeal dated NIL. FAA's order
dated 13.12.2021, upheld the reply of CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the complainant approached the
Commission with the instant complaint.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Complainant: Not present.

Respondent: J. Narayanan, Administrative Officer & CPIO present through
video-conference.



The Commission remarked at the outset that the Complainant telephonically
informed the Registry of this bench that he will not be able to participate in
the hearing owing to personal exigencies and prayed the Commission that his
cases may be decided on merit.



The CPIO vide written submission dated 18.01.2023 submitted as under -

       "...3. The information sought was related to discrimination between
animals with goods. The subject matter does not fall under the core mandate of
NBA. As NBA did not have any information on the subject matter, the same was
conveyed to the appellant. The primary functions of NBA are prescribed under

Section 3
,
4
,
6
 & 
20
 of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002.



4. The National Biodiversity Authority being a statutory body at the apex level,
regulates the access of biological resources as per the provisions of the

Biological Diversity Act, 2002
 and promptly takes action on RTIs with utmost
sincerity. Therefore, it is humbly requested that the Hon'ble Information
Commission may close the application as the fact has been intimated to the
appellant...."



Decision:



At the outset, the Commission observes from a perusal of records that a
bunch of Complaints (s)/ Appeals bearing File no. CIC/MORTH/A/2020/685460
& others of the same Complainant against same/another public authority have
already been heard and disposed of by this bench on 07.11.2022 and
27.12.2022. In this regard, it is also worth noting that the instant Complaints
listed for today's hearing have been heard together along with other 8 mattes
of the Complainant simultaneously and the Complainant has filed numerous
RTI Applications for the same nature of information sought by merely
expanding the nature of information sought in each of his RTI Applications
merely to pressurize the public authority into acceding to his request for
similar nature of information. It appears that the Complainant has grossly
misconceived the idea of exercising his Right to Information as being absolute
and unconditional. It is rather unfortunate that even the best of intentions
have to not only stand the test of procedural requirements and fetters laid
down in the 
RTI Act
 but also stand the test of practicality, a notion well
recognised by superior Courts through various judgments such as the Hon'ble
Supreme Court's observation in Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE)
& anr. v. Aditya Bandhopadhyay and others [(2011) 8 SCC 497] stating that:



           "37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information
     and right to information are intended to be formidable tools in the
     hands of responsible citizens to fight corruption and to bring in
     transparency and accountability. The provisions of 
RTI Act
 should be
     enforced strictly and all efforts should be made to bring to light the
     necessary information under clause (b) of 
section 4(1)
 of the Act which
      relates to securing transparency and accountability in the working of
     public authorities and in discouraging corruption. But in regard to
     other information,(that is information other than those enumerated
     in 
section 4(1)(b)
 and (c) of the Act), equal importance and emphasis
     are given to other public interests (like confidentiality of sensitive
     information, fidelity and fiduciary relationships, efficient operation of
     governments, etc.). Indiscriminate and impractical demands or
     directions under 
RTI Act
 for disclosure of all and sundry information
     (unrelated to transparency and accountability in the functioning of
     public authorities and eradication of corruption) would be counter-
     productive as it will adversely affect the efficiency of the
     administration and result in the executive getting bogged down with
     the non- productive work of collecting and furnishing information. 
The
     Act
 should not be allowed to be misused or abused, to become a tool
     to obstruct the national development and integration, or to destroy
     the peace, tranquility and harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be
     converted into a tool of oppression or intimidation of honest officials
     striving to do their duty. The nation does not want a scenario where
     75% of the staff of public authorities spends 75% of their time in
     collecting and furnishing information to applicants instead of
     discharging their regular duties. The threat of penalties under the 
RTI
     Act
 and the pressure of the authorities under the 
RTI Act
 should not
     lead to employees of a public authorities prioritising 'information
     furnishing', at the cost of their normal and regular duties." (Emphasis
     Supplied)

In view of the foregoing, the Complainant is advised to make judicious use of
his right to information in future."

Notwithstanding the aforesaid, the Commission after scrutinizing the contents
of RTI Application(s) in question is of the considered view that the queries
raised by the Complainant are vague and unspecific which concededly do not
conform to 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act per se. In this regard, the Complainant shall
note that the outstretching the interpretation of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act to
include deductions and inferences to be drawn by the CPIO is unwarranted as
it casts immense pressure on the CPIOs to ensure that they provide the correct
deduction/inference to avoid being subject to penal provisions under the 
RTI
Act
. For the sake of clarity, the provision of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act is
reproduced hereunder:

      "2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--

        (f) "information" means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in
any electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in
force;.."

His attention is also drawn towards a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
on the scope and ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act in the matter of CBSE vs.
Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors. [CIVIL APPEAL NO.6454 of 2011] wherein it was
held as under:

 
"35. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some misconceptions
  about the 
RTI Act
. 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is
  available and existing.........A public authority is also not required to furnish
  information which require drawing of inferences and/or making of
  assumptions. It is also not required to provide `advice' or `opinion' to an
  applicant, nor required to obtain and furnish any `opinion' or `advice' to an
  applicant. The reference to `opinion' or `advice' in the definition of
  `information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers to such material
  available in the records of the public authority. Many public authorities
  have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and opinion to
  the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused with any
  obligation under the 
RTI Act
." (Emphasis Supplied)

Similarly, in the matter of 
Khanapuram Gandaiah vs Administrative Officer &
Ors
 [SLP (CIVIL) NO.34868 OF 2009], Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:




      "6. 
Under the RTI Act
 "information" is defined under 
Section 2(f)
 which
provides:



       "information" means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, report, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force."



      This definition shows that an applicant under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act can
get any information which is already in existence and accessible to the public
authority under law. Of course, under the 
RTI Act
 an applicant is entitled to get
copy of the opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he cannot ask for any
information as to why such opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc. have been
passed...."

 
"7....Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material
which is not before him; or any information he could have obtained under law.
Under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such
information which can be accessed by the "public authority" under any other
law for the time being in force. The answers sought by the petitioner in the
application could not have been with the public authority nor could he have
had access to this information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged to give
any reasons as to why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was
before him...." (Emphasis Supplied)

And, in the matter of 
Dr. Celsa Pinto, Ex-Officio Joint Secretary,(School
Education) vs. The Goa State Information Commission
 [2008 (110) Bom L R
1238], the Hon'ble Bombay High Court held as under:




      "..... In the first place, the Commission ought to have noticed that the Act
confers on the citizen the right to information. Information has been defined
by 
Section 2(f)
 as follows.



 
Section 2(f)
 -Information means any material in any form, including
records, documents, memos e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars,
orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material
held in any electronic form and information relating to any private body which
can be accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in
force;

      The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the question why
which would be the same thing as asking the reason for a justification for a
particular thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot expect to
communicate to the citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not
done in the sense of a justification because the citizen makes a requisition
about information. Justifications are matter within the domain of
adjudicating authorities and cannot properly be classified as information."

(Emphasis Supplied)

Nonetheless, the reply and as a sequel to it further clarifications tendered by
the CPIO during hearing is in the spirit of 
RTI Act
, merits of which cannot be
called into question.



Moreover, no penal action against the CPIO can be initiated in the absence of
any malafide ascribed on their part. 
In this regard, the attention of the
Complainant is drawn towards a judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in
 the matter of 
Registrar of Companies & Ors. v. Dharmendra Kumar Garg &
Anr
. [W.P.(C) 11271/2009] dated 01.06.2012 wherein it was held:


      " 61. It can happen that the PIO may genuinely and bonafidely entertain
      the belief and hold the view that the information sought by the querist
      cannot be provided for one or the other reasons. Merely because the CIC
      eventually finds that the view taken by the PIO was not correct, it cannot
      automatically lead to issuance of a show cause notice under 
Section 20

      of the RTI Act and the imposition of penalty. The legislature has
      cautiously provided that only in cases of malafides or unreasonable
      conduct, i.e., where the PIO, without reasonable cause refuses to receive
      the application, or provide the information, or knowingly gives incorrect,
      incomplete or misleading information or destroys the information, that
      the personal penalty on the PIO can be imposed...."



Additionally, the following observation of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in

Bhagat Singh v. CIC & Ors. WP(C
) 3114/2007 are pertinent in this matter:




    "17. This Court takes a serious note of the two year delay in releasing
    information, the lack of adequate reasoning in the orders of the Public
    Information Officer and the Appellate Authority and the lack of application
    of mind in relation to the nature of information sought. The materials on
    record clearly show the lackadaisical approach of the second and third
    respondent in releasing the information sought. However, the Petitioner
    has not been able to demonstrate that they malafidely denied the
    information sought. Therefore, a direction to the Central Information
    Commission to initiate action under 
Section 20
 of the Act, cannot be
    issued."



Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the decision of Col. 
Rajendra
Singh v. Central Information Commission and Anr. WP (C
) 5469 of 2008 dated
20.03.2009 had held as under:




    "....
Section 20
, no doubt empowers the CIC to take penal action and direct
    payment of such compensation or penalty as is warranted. Yet the
    Commission has to be satisfied that the delay occurred was without
    reasonable cause or the request was denied malafidely.

                                        xxx
    ......The preceding discussion shows that at least in the opinion of this
    Court, there are no allegations to establish that the information was
    withheld malafide or unduly delayed so as to lead to an inference that
    petitioner was responsible for unreasonably withholding it."

 The Commission also notes that Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana at
Chandigarh in Civil Writ Petition No.6504 of 2009 Date of decision:

04.03.2010 (
State of Punjab and others vs. State Information Commissioner,
Punjab and another
); had held as under:




     "3. The penalty provisions under 
Section 20
 is only to sensitize the public
     authorities that they should act with all due alacrity and not hold up
     information which a person seeks to obtain. It is not every delay that
     should be visited with penalty."



Having observed as above and considering the inability of the Complainant in
substantiating his level of dissatisfaction with the CPIO's reply in the instant
Complaint, no further action is warranted in the instant matter.



                  The complaint is disposed of accordingly.




                                                Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहा न)
                                    Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु त)
Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत        त)


(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
दनांक /