[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Ajai Bamnehwal vs Reserve Bank Of India on 23 June, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                            बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/RBIND/A/2021/644040

AJAI BAMNEHWAL
(Bank of India)                                         ......अपीलकता /Appellant

                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम

CPIO,
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA, DEPTT.
OF SUPERVISION, CENTRAL OFFICE,
WORLD TRADE CENTRE 1, CUFFE
PARADE, COLABA, MUMBAI-400005                      .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                   :   12/06/2023
Date of Decision                  :   12/06/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

(Note: The instant appeal has been filed by the third party i.e. Bank of India
aggrieved by an order passed by the FAA, RBI) Proceedings in the matter are
being pursued in pursuance of the following interim decision dated 08.02.2022.

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on          :   26/04/2019
CPIO replied on                   :   29/11/2019 & 23/06/2021
First appeal filed on             :   25/06/2021
First Appellate Authority order   :   18/08/2021
Second Appeal dated               :   01/11/2021

                                         1
 "5. The appellant's representative Advocate Devansh Gupta,, Advocate Sadaf vali
for Bank of India attended the hearing in person; RTI applicant Shri Girisir Mittal
remained absent; and on behalf of respondent Shri Abhay Kumar, General
Manager & CPIO, Shri Vinod Kumar, Dy. General Manager, Shri Nayyeem Akhtar.,
Asstt. Legal Advisor, Ms. Rajeshwari Ra.i Pathak, Director Reserve Bank of India,
Bandra attended the hearing through video conferencing.
5.1 . The appellant's advocate inter alia submitted that their immediatc concern
was to prevent disclosure of the information. Therefore, in the meantime that the
Commission decides the matter as per the merits ol the case, the appellant bank
sought interim order restraining the CPIO from releasing the information sought
by the applicant Shri Girish Mittal as the same wouid cause irreparable loss to the
appellant bank and the present appeal would become infructuous.
5.2. The respondent did not raise any objections and submitted that they were
prepared to oblige the orders of the Commission.
6. The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case,
hearing both the parties and perusal of records, acceded to the request of the
appellant bank seeking stay on the CPIO's order 29.11.2019 and FAA's order dated
18.08.2021. The appellant is directed to file their written submissions before the
Commission after serving copies thereof upon the respondents within three weeks.
The respondents may also file their counter submissions within three weeks from
the date of the submissions from the appellant bank. It may be noted that the
matter involves substantial questions of law determination of which require
detailed submissions from parties as well as their presence either in person or
through video conference. In view of this, the operation of the CPIO's reply dated
29.11.2019 and FAA's order dated 18.08.2021 shall remain stayed till further
orders. Accordingly, the matter is adjourned.
Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties."

Information sought
:



The RTI applicant Shri Girish Mittal filed an RTI application dated 26.04.2019
seeking the following information:

"(a)Kindly provide copies of inspection reports of ICICI Bank, AXIS Bank, Yes Bank,
HDFC Bank & State Bank of India from, Bank of Baroda, Punjab National Bank,
Union Bank of India from 1st April, 2015 till date.



(b)Kindly provide copies of any show cause notices issued to banks mentioned in
point (a), response to the show cause notices and action taken, if any, by RBI.



                                        2


 (c) Kindly provide list of defaulters of loans greater than 50 crores as available
with RBI.



(d)Copies of case files with file notings on various irregularities detected by RBI in
case of Sahara Group of companies and erstwhile Bank of Rajasthan by these
entities themselves and their known/unknown promoters.



(e)Kindly provide information on amount spent in form of fees of lawyers, out of
pocket expenses along with any other charges spent by RBI in defending the cases
against the orders of CIC in High Courts/Supreme Court. Kindly provide list giving
details in each case or provide copies of challans, invoices, bills etc with file noting;

approvals et al. 'This information needs to be provided even if it is not available on
a consolidated basis and spread across various files.



(f)Kindly provide information on the directory of employees of RBI which is
required to be declared as per 4(1)(b) (10) with their email ids. The details on
website do not give their, mobile phone s(if paid by RBI) and email id."



In response, the CPIO vide its letter dated 29.11.2019 issued a notice
 u/s. 11(3)
 of
the RTI Act to the Appellant i.e. Bank of India stating as under:



       "Since the information sought by the applicant relates to your bank, a
notice is given under 
section 11(1)
 read with 
section 11(2)
 of the Right to
Information Act, 2005 to enable you to make a written submission within ten days
from the date of receipt of this notice as to whether the information sought by
the applicant may be disclosed or not along with reasons for the same indicating
clearly, whether the said information proposed to be provided to the applicant is
eligible for exemption under any clause of 
RTI Act, 2005
."



The CPIO, RBI furnished a reply to the Appellant Bank on 23.06.2021 stating as
under:



      "Please refer to our letter dated November 29, 2019 wherein we had issued
a notice under 
Section 11(1)
 read with 
Section 11(2)
 of the Right to Information
Act, 2005 with respect to captioned RTI requests to enable you to make a written
submission as to whether the information may be disclosed or not along with
reasons for exemption from disclosed under any clause of 
RTI Act, 2005
. •




                                           3

       After considering your response dated 13.12.2019 to the above notice, we
intend to disclose the list of defaulters of loans greater than Rs. 50 crores to the
applicant.



      Hence, a Notice under 
Section 11(3)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 is hereby given
apprising you of the decision taken by CPIO in the matter."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 25.06.2021. FAA's order
dated 18.08.2021 upheld the reply of CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Appellant Bank approached the
Commission with the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Ms. Milli Verma, Advocate authorized representative of the Bank
present through Intra Video-Conference.

Respondent: Ms. Sangeeta Sheoran, Manager present through Video-Conference.
RTI Applicant: Shri Girish Mittal present through Video-Conference.



The written submissions of the Appellant Bank are taken on record.



The Authorized Representative of the Bank submitted on the lines of the written
submissions stating as under:

"That the sought information pertains to the third parties of the Appellant Bank of
India, which is a third party of the RTI applicant in this case. The RTI Application
dated 27.03.2019 and 26.04.2019 seeks to disclose the details of defaulters of
loans greater than 50 crores of Appellant Bank as on June 30, 2019 to the RTI
applicant. That in the RTI applicatison of Registration No. RBIND/R/2019/51315/1
and RBIND/R/2019/51887, the Ld. CPIO issued a notice under 
section 11(1)
 read
with 
Section 11(2)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 on RTI application bearing Ref. No:
DOS.CO.RIA. 3400/01.12.001/2019-20 (Vol. 11) dated 29.11.2019 along with a list
of 100 defaulters to the Bank of India (Appellant herein), being a Third Party to
make written submissions whether the information sought by the Applicant may
be disclosed or not along with reasons for the same clearly indicating whether the
said information proposed to be provided to the applicant is eligible for exemption
under any clause of 
RTI Act
 2005, which is in fact crucial information related to
third party of the Appellant Bank. 
5. That the Appellant Bank filed a written

                                         4

 submission dated 13.12.2019 bearing Ref. no. HO: LGL: NH: 947 and clarified that
the disclosure of the information sought includes such information which are
exempted from disclosure under 
section 8(1) (d) (e)
 & (j) of the 
RTI Act
 and as per

Section 13
 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition & Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
1970, Bank shall not divulge information/details pertaining to its customers.a.
Further, the disclosure of such information would lead to violation of various laws
of confidentiality imposed by other statutes. Moreover, the Appellant pleaded the
non-disclosure on the ground of an order passed by the Hon'ble CIC in 
Amitava
Chaudhary v Canara Bank
 & other Banks and also quoted the order of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Writ Petition No.573 of 2003 and hence denied the information
sought by the RTI applicant 
in that case
.
 
The Appellant herein has pointed out
various orders passed by the CIC in 
Dr. D.B. Bhatia vs. Indian Overseas Bank
,

Sunita Shiva Prasad Mishra vs Bank of India
 (vide its order dated 17.07.2019) in its
defense. That the Ld. CPIO of RBI in his decision dated 23.06.2021, vide Ref. No.
RS(99)/01.12.001/2020-21 (Vol. 01), had adjudicated to disclose the list of
defaulters of loans greater than 50 crores of the Appellant Bank as on June 30,
2019, without any reasons or clarifications. It is pertinent to mention that the Ld.
CPIO had not applied his mind diligently, and not provided any reasoning,
whatsoever valid or not, in his Order dated 23.06.2021, despite the valid
objections raised by the Appellant Bank which included not only the plea not to
disclose confidential information pertaining to third parties of the Appellant Bank,
which itself is a third party to the RTI applicant, but also the plea with respect to
the law regarding the 
RTI Act
 and 
Section 13
 of the Banking Act 1970.


7. That aggrieved with the impugned decision of Ld. CPIO, the Appellant herein
filed first appeal RBIND/ A/P/21/00384 vide letter dated 25.06.2021 bearing
number HO: LGL: MY: 272 before the Ld. First Appellate Authority, the Executive
Director of Reserve Bank of India against the decision of Ld. CPIO as the impugned
decision of Ld. CPIO to disclose the confidential information of the Appellant was
in contravention to 
Section 8(1)
, (d) (e) and (j) of the 
RTI Act
 and also contended
that the Appellant Bank has not consented to the disclosure of the names and
details of the defaulters on the ground of 
Section 13
 of Banking Companies
(Acquisition & Transfer of Undertakings )Act 1970. It is pertinent to mention that
the Appellant Bank has also stated that various judicial pronouncements have
been cited in their reply to CPIO and have not been considered by the CPIO and
hence such information cannot be disclosed.

8. That the Ld. First Appellate Authority erroneously and contrary to 
RTI Act
, has
not intervened with the order of Ld. CPIO and dismissed the first appeal filed by
Bank of India vide the impugned order dated 18.08.2021 and had erred in
directing for the disclosure of the information which are exempted from being

                                         5

 disclosed under 
section 8
 of the RTI Act and the said impugned order is challenged
in this Second Appeal. The Appellant is aggrieved by the fact that the Ld. First
Appellate Authority has confirmed the decision of Ld. CPIO regarding the
disclosure of the information, which was protected under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI
Act and by various pronouncements / orders of the Hon'ble CIC.

9. That it is pertinent to mention that the Ld. FAA, vide its abovementioned Order
dated 18.08.2021, erroneously gave its reasoning while upholding the order of Ld
CPIO stating that the information sought by the RTI applicant is under the control
of RBI and merely pertains to Bank of India and fiduciary relationship between the
Bank of India and its customers do not affect the decision of CPIO and hence the
appeal is accordingly dismissed by the First Appellate AuthorityXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
That the Appellant has in fact cited another case in its reply to the CPIO vide its
letter dated 13.12.2019 i.e; 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban
Development Corporation & Ors. (Writ Petition
(s) (C) No. 573/2003) which is
pending before Hon'ble Supreme Court, and it is squarely applicable to this case.


The learned FAA and CPIO ignored the said case and wrongly relied on Jayantilal
Mistry's case.

12. That this Hon'ble CIC has reproduced an important observation of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban Development
Corporation & Ors. (Writ Petition
(s) (C) No. 573/2003) and cited the same in its
order of 
Amitava Choudhary vs. Canara Bank
 & other banks as under: " .... we
direct that whatever information regarding bad debts is available with the RBI in
regard to the debtors who are in default of payment of amounts more than
Rs.500/- Crores shall be filed along with the affidavit in a sealed cover".


13. That, said case of 
Public Interest Litigation vs Housing & Urban Development
Corporation & Others
 is still pending before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court has received the said information in a sealed cover. The
subject of this second Appeal is the same in nature, identical in subject of the
above writ petition 573 /2003 and the scope of which is squarely and directly
covered by the aforementioned observation......"




Ms. Sangeeta Sheoran, Manager submitted on the lines of the written
submissions filed by their CPIO stating as under:



                                         6


 The original RTI applicant Shri Girish Mittal submitted that it is the legal duty of
the RBI to disclose complete information to him as per Jayantilal Mistry's case.



                                           7


 Decision:



In the facts of the instant case, it is pertinent to note that a decision of a
coordinate bench of the Commission in the matter of various third-party banks vs.
RBI vide File No. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 covers a
detailed discussion inter alia on the same nature of information sought for from
the RBI and the reliance placed by RBI on the Jayantilal Mistry case. Suffice to say
that the issues raised in the instant case are encapsulated in that same discussion
of the coordinate bench in the following manner:



        "39. A comprehensive view has to be taken on the objection filed by the
institutions. These objectives has to be deliberated and adjudicated in the light of
Jayantilal Mistry's case and other judicial pronouncements relevant in such
matter, some of which have been referred by the Commission in the above parts
as well. The Commission while examining various objections realize that the Writ
Petitions filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is seeking directions of
the Supreme Court for non-disclosure of certain aspects of these audit/inspection
report and any such guidance in these Writ Petitions will have direct bearing and
provide further clarity to the CPIO/FAA in adjudicating various aspects of
disclosure/non-disclosure of reports or the information/data which are part of
these reports under the provisions of the 
RTI Act
. The Commission takes note that
all the cases/second appeals filed herein are based on interpretations of RBI Vs.
Jayantilal Mistry case and other relevant judicial pronouncements requesting for
full disclosure vis-à-vis with exemptions under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act for non-
disclosure of full or parts of these reports.

        40. In view of the above observations, the Commission is of the view that
the reports generated in the hands of regulatory public authority in discharge of
its statutory obligations are information under 
Section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act, as the
regulator and the regulated entities are not governed by fiduciary relationship.

The orders of the Commission to their effect has been upheld by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's case and the position is unchanged even
today. Various objections filed by banks/financial institutions, to be examined,
analyzed and adjudicated upon, are related to various data and information
submitted to the Reserve Bank of India by these financial institutions explaining
their operations, commercial decisions, clients data etc. under statutory
obligations can be disclosed as such. There are apparently two set of such
information which have been shared by the institutions with the regulator under
statutory obligation. First is the information/data of clients relating to their
business/commercial operations, financial transactions, business and commercial

                                         8

 strategy which is shared by clients with financial institutions in full trust and
confidence and is held by them in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure
under the 
RTI Act
 in their hands. Second set is the information relating to business
strategy, decisions, transactions, other operational data etc. of financial
institutions have been bearing on their competitive position which also enjoys the
exemption from disclosure in their hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise,
under the 
RTI Act
. Some of such data, on case to case basis be sensitive enough for
protection of national interest. The Commission is of the view that the protection
of disclosure of information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of
financial institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in
good faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligation. Various
observations of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's case also does not
indicate so and decision of the regulator to consider redacting such
data/information while disclosing the reports is aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts.

       41. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of
the CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care
has to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making
reasoned order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and later
in the hands of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be required to
adjudicate such RTI applications in the light of the observations of the Commission
afresh. The Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various
objections filed by the Banks and Financial Institutions and submissions made by
applicant to reach the decision in favour or against redaction of various parts of
the report on case to case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry case and other relevant judgments, some of
which have been referred in this order as well. Hence, with these observations the
orders passed by the CPIO and FAA in these matters are set aside and the cases
are being remanded to the CPIO for adjudication afresh. (Emphasis Supplied)

       42. It is amply clear that Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and
others tagged are admitted in Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein guidance and
direction has been sought on non-disclosure of certain type of information which
are essentially the part of the Annual Inspection Report/RAR, etc. These petitions
also seek protection of interim communication between regulator and the
regulated entity in the process of finalization of these reports or otherwise. It is
obvious that decision in these Writ Petitions will provide clarity and guidance to
the Public Authority on redaction/non-disclosure of a set of information inspite of
being part of these reports which are open to disclosure. At this stage, any
decision by the Public Authority will amount to pre-judging the issues pending

                                         9

 admitted Writ Petitions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Various banks,
financial institutions, respondent public authority and the RTI applicant have
already impleaded party and are presenting their arguments before the Apex
Court.

       43. Hence, any decision of redaction or disclosure of information, without
waiting for decision in the Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged may cause irrevocable damage against right of privacy and protection of
commercial interest. Hence, the respondent public authority if expedient may
wait for the outcome in Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged or seek clarification from the Hon'ble Court and accordingly decide these
RTI applications by following process as enumerated in the earlier paras by the
Commission in the interest of principles of natural justice. While disclosing the
information they should be cautious in taking a considerate view balancing right
to privacy, protection of national and commercial interest on one hand vis-à-vis
larger public interest. (Emphasis Supplied)

 
44. It is further observed that similar view has also been taken by the
Division Bench of the Commission in file bearing nos. CIC/VS/A/2013/001488 and
CIC/VS/A/2013/001805 dated 11.05.2017 wherein the Commission observed that
'Having considered the submissions of both the parties, the Commission observes
that since a similar issue is pending adjudication before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the matter of Central for 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. &Ors.
, it would be judicious to await the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court. However, on receipt of the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter, the appellant shall be at
liberty to file second appeal afresh, if he so desires. The instant appeals are
disposed of'."




The above decision is therefore applicable to the instant case and no separate line
of adjudication is warranted in the matter. The stipulations contained in para 41
& 43 to which emphasis has been supplied as above stands endorsed to the
Respondent CPIO in the instant case as well and necessary action be taken in
this regard.



                      The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )


                                        10

 Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                 11