[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Rajan Gupta vs Department Of Telecommunications on 20 January, 2026


                              के ीय सू चना आयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                           बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                         नई िद ी, New Delhi - 110067

 File No: CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715

 Rajan Gupta                                                     .....अपीलकता/Appellant

                                               VERSUS
                                                बनाम

 CPIO
 M/o Communications and
 Information Technology,
 Department of Telecommunications,
 Director(SPPI-II) & CPIO, (SPPI Wing),
 905,Sanchar Bhawan, 20, Ashoka
 Road, Sansad Marg Area, New Delhi-
 110001.                                                      .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

 Date of Hearing                     :   12.01.2026
 Date of Decision                    :   19.01.2026

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :               Jaya Varma Sinha

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

 RTI application filed on            :   11.09.2024
 CPIO replied on                     :   23.09.2024
 First appeal filed on               :   13.10.2024
 First Appellate Authority's order   :   24.10.2024
 2nd Appeal dated                    :   20.11.2024

Information sought
:



1.    The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 11.09.2024 (offline) seeking
      the following information:



      "1.The applicant has submitted an online application on 15.05.2023 before the
      Central Public Information Officer, Office of Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi

CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715                                                     Page 1 of 13

       for providing the information. Copy of application is appended as Annexure A-

      1.


      2. That vide response dated 01.06.2023, the CPIO of office of Ministry of Home
      Affairs, informed the information seeker that his application has been
      transferred under Section 6(3) to the office of your good self. The copy of
      response dated 01.06.2023 as given by the respondent is appended as Annexure
      A-2.



      3.That in this situation, you are requested to provide us the information as has
      been sought vide Annexure A-1."



2.    The CPIO furnished a reply to the Appellant on 23.09.2024 stating as
      under:



      "With regard to information sought under points (3), it is to inform that
      information pertaining to Review Committee is highly confidential and cannot
      be disclosed under 
Section 8(g)
 & 
8(h)
 of RTI Act, 2005."



3.    Being dissatisfied, the Appellant filed a First Appeal dated 13.10.2024. The
      FAA vide its order dated 24.10.2024, held as under:



      "I have gone through the Appeal dated 13.10.24 along with the RTI reply dated
      23.09.2024. The CPIO has informed that 'With regard to information sought
      under points (3), it is to inform that the information pertaining to Review
      Committee is highly confidential and cannot be disclosed under 
Section 8(g)
 &
      
8(h)
 of RTI Act, 2005.



      I am in agreement with the CPIO and the reply is in order. Accordingly, the
      Appeal is disposed of."



4.    Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, Appellant approached the Commission
      with the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerged during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Advocate Anurag Jain, representative of the Appellant attended the
hearing through VC.

Respondent: Shri M. Raj Anup, CPIO-cum-Director, attended the hearing in
person.



CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715                                                    Page 2 of 13


 
5.   The representative of the Appellant stated that the Respondent has not
     provided the relevant information as sought in the instant RTI Application.
     He added that in view of the ratio laid down by the Hon'ble High Court of
     Delhi in the matters of Bhagat Singh vs. CIC decided on 03.12.2007 in W.P.
     (C) No. 3114 of 2007 and in the matter of 
B.S. Mathur vs. PIO of Delhi High

     Court decided on 03.06.2011, the exemptions claimed by the Respondent
     under 
Section 8 (1) (g)
 and (h) of the 
RTI Act
 does not hold good. He
     further placed on record the copy of the above judgments on record.




6.   The Respondent submitted that the information pertaining to Review
     Committee is highly confidential and cannot be disclosed under 
Section 8


1 (g)
 & (h) of 
RTI Act, 2005
.



7.   While explaining the brief background of the case, he submitted that the
     Appellant is seeking Minutes of Meeting of the Review Committee dated
     25.04.2022 wherein interception done by various Law Enforcement
     agencies including the CBI for the interception orders issued by the
     Ministry of the Home Affairs. He added that such information pertaining
     to lawful interceptions undertaken in the interest of sovereignty,
     Integrity, security of the State, and public order. Disclosure of such
     records would expose sensitive information furnished in confidence to
     Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) and may compromise the intelligence
     gathering methods thereby, defeating the basic purpose of interception.
     Accordingly, exemption under 
Section 8 (1) (g)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 has
     been rightly invoked. Further, the records sought also pertain to
     interception orders issued for several numbers to various LEAs that might
     be connected with investigations, prosecutions, and proceedings, the
     status and scope of which are known only to the concerned LEAS.
     Disclosure of such information at this stage would impede Investigation
     and prosecution processes by prematurely revealing sensitive details,
     thereby attracting the exemption under 
Section 8 (1) (h)
 of the RTI Act,
     2005. It is also relevant that certain recipient agencies, including the CBI,
     are exempt organizations under 
Section 24 (1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, and
     disclosure of information inextricably linked to such agencies through
     another public authority would defeat the legislative intent of the
     exemption.



CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715                                                Page 3 of 13


 
8.   He apprised the Bench of the fact that the Appellant is also in litigation
     with the department before the Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court
     in CRM. M. No. 6657 of 2023 (
Rajan Gupta vs CBI
), wherein DoT had filed
     an affidavit dated 20.03.2023, conveying the outcome of the Review
     Committee's consideration of the interception orders in question in a
     sealed cover. However, the copies of the minutes of the Review
     Committee meeting were not disclosed. Exemption from disclosure of
     such records was specifically claimed under 
Section 123
 of the Indian
     Evidence Act, 1872, with the due approval of the competent authority,
     and the same was accepted by the Hon'ble Court, as it appears from court
     order dated 19.04.2023, which is as under:




     "1. The present petition has been filed under 
Section 482
 Cr.P.C. for issuance of
     any appropriate order or direction for quashing of Impugned order dated
     11.01.2023 (Annexure P-5), whereby the application filed by the petitioner
     under 
Section 91
 Cr.P.C. has been dismissed.

     2. Mr. Dheeraj Jaln, Senior Panel Counsel appearing for respondent No. 2-UOI
     submits that the documents which the petitioner wants, have already been
     destroyed. Respondent No. 2 shall hand over the demanded documents except
     the minutes to the petitioner in case the same had not already been destroyed,

     3. At this stage, Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that as per
     rules they cannot destroy the documents.

     4. Be that as it may, this Court is not going into this moot question and the
     petitioner has a liberty to take up this point in academic question in any other
     petition.

     5. After hearing counsel for the parties at length, which order this Court
     proposes to pass is that it shall be permissible for the petitioner to apply for
     minutes, in case he wants to apply, it shall be permissible to him to apply under
     the 
Right to Information Act
 but in the present proceedings, the said documents
     cannot be ordered to be given to him.

     6. Given above, the present petition is disposed of with the above observations."



9.   The Commission orally directed the Respondent to file a detailed written
     submissions in view of the above statements made during the hearing. In
     compliance the oral directions of the Commission, a written submission
     has been received from Shri M. Raj Anup, CPIO-cum-Director, vide letter
     dated 14.01.2026, stating as under:



CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715                                                    Page 4 of 13


        "Kind reference is invited to the Notice of Hearing issued by the Central
       Information Commission vide File No. CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715 dated
       24.12.2025, and the subsequent proceedings held during the second appeal
       hearing on 12.01.2026 at 12:00 PM before the Hon'ble Information
       Commissioner, Ms. Jaya Varma Sinha, in connection with the RTI application
       dated 11.09.2024 filed by Shri Rajan Gupta, S/o Shri Manohar Lal Gupta, R/o
       House No. 2507, Sector-47C, Chandigarh-160047.

       2. The applicant vide RTI Application dated 11.09.2024 requested information
       on the following:

       a) Minutes of meeting of the Review Committee dated 25.04.2022 wherein
       interception done by various Law Enforcement agencies including the CBI for the
       interception orders issued by the Ministry of the Home Affairs
 u/s 5(2)
 of the
       Indian Telegraph Act 1884 read with Rule 419A of the same from 01.01.2022 to
       01.04.2022 were reviewed.

       b) That in case the whole minutes of meeting of the review committee dated
       25.04.2022 cannot be provided, the minutes pertaining to the review of the
       interception orders of mobile no. 9872477507 may be provided.

       3. The applicant further stated in the RTI application that the same was being
       filed in pursuance of the order dated 19.04.2023 passed by the Hon'ble Punjab
       & Haryana High Court in CRM M 6657 of 2023.

       4. Vide letter dated 23.09.2024, the undersigned, in the capacity of Central
       Public Information Officer (CPIO), informed the applicant that the information
       pertaining to Review Committee is highly confidential and cannot be disclosed
       under 
Section 8(g)
 & 
8(h)
 of RTI Act, 2005.



      5. Aggrieved by the said reply, the applicant preferred a first appeal dated
      13.10.2024, which was examined by the First Appellate Authority (FAA). The
      FAA, after due consideration, vide letter dated 24.10.2024, upheld the reply of
      the CPIO and disposed of the appeal.

      6. Thereafter, the applicant filed a second appeal before the Central Information
      Commission. The undersigned attended the hearing in person on 12.01.2026 at
      12:00 PM before the Hon'ble Information Commissioner, Ms. Jaya Varma Sinha,
      while the advocates representing the applicant participated through video
      conferencing.

      7. Pursuant to the oral directions of the Hon'ble Information Commissioner
      during the hearing held on 12.01.2026, the following is hereby submitted:

      i. Lawful interception of messages is undertaken by authorised Law Enforcement
      Agencies in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 5(2)
 of the Indian
      Telegraph Act, 1885 (now replaced by Section 20(2)(a) of the
      Telecommunications Act, 2023), read with Rule 419A of the Indian Telegraph
      Rules, 1951 (now replaced by the Telecommunications (Procedures and
      Safeguards for Lawful Interception of Messages) Rules, 2024).
      ii. As per Rule 419A(17) of the Indian Telegraph Rules, the Review Committee,
      constituted vide Rule 419A(16) of the said rules, shall record its findings whether
      the directions issued under sub-rule(1) of the Rule 419A are in accordance with
      the provisions of sub-section (2) of 
section 5
 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885

CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715                                                         Page 5 of 13

      and if the Review Committee is of the opinion that the directions are not in
     accordance with the provisions 
referred to above
, it may set aside the directions
     and orders for destruction of the copies of the intercepted message or class of
     messages.

 
iii. The minutes of the Review Committee meetings are issued and maintained
     by the Department of Telecommunications (DoT), Government of India. The
     records of the Review Committee are official records comprising inputs related
     to various other investigating agencies like Intelligence Bureau, Enforcement
     Directorate, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, and other law enforcement
     agencies besides Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), as well. Therefore, it
     would not be in the public interest to disclose such documents since it could
     hamper any ongoing Investigation or go against the public interest.
     iv. It is further submitted that, in the proceedings before the Hon'ble Punjab and
     Haryana High Court in CRM. M. No. 6657 of 2023 (
Rajan Gupta vs CBI
), DoT had
     filed an affidavit dated 20.03.2023, conveying the outcome of the Review
     Committee's consideration of the interception orders in question, Including the
     interception order relating to mobile number 9872477507 referred to in the
     present RTI application. However, the copies of the minutes of the Review
     Committee meeting were not disclosed. Exemption from disclosure of such
     records was specifically claimed under 
Section 123
 of the Indian Evidence Act,
     1872, with the due approval of the competent authority, and the same was
     accepted by the Hon'ble Court, as it appears from court order dated 19.04.2023
     (copy enclosed).


     V. The Review Committee minutes relate to information pertaining to lawful
     interception undertaken in the interest of sovereignty. Integrity, security of the
     State, and public order. Disclosure of such records would expose sensitive
     information furnished in confidence to Law Enforcement Agencies and may
     compromise the intelligence-gathering methods defeating the basic purpose of
     interception. Accordingly, exemption under 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of the RTI Act, 2005
     has been rightly invoked.

     vi. Further, the records sought also pertain to interception orders issued for
     several numbers to various LEAs that might be connected with investigations,
     prosecutions, and proceedings, the status and scope of which are known only to
     the concerned LEAS. Disclosure of such information at this stage would impede
     Investigation and prosecution processes by prematurely revealing sensitive
     details, thereby attracting the exemption under 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act,
     2005. It is also relevant that certain recipient agencies, including the CBI, are
     exempt organizations under 
Section 24(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, and disclosure
     of information inextricably linked to such agencies through another public
     authority would defeat the legislative intent of the exemption.
     vii. 
In this regard, reliance is placed on the judgment dated 08.12.2021 of the
     Hon'ble High Court of Madras in 
Gulab Singh Rana vs CPIO, Indian Overseas
     Bank & Ors
 (copy enclosed). Para 50 of the said judgement order is re-iterated
     below:




CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715                                                     Page 6 of 13


              50. Considering the fact that the Central Information Commission
             elaborately considered the grounds raised by the petitioner in the order
             passed in the Second Appeal, arrived a conclusion that the exemption
             granted to CBI from applicability of the 
RTI Act
, in terms of 
Section 24 (1)

             would became meaningless. If RTI applicants would get information from
             another Public Authority, the very information that they cannot get from
             the CBI or information, inexplicably linked to the information and
             materials provided by the CBI to the Public Authority.



      viii. The 2 judgement copies of Hon'ble High court of Delhi in cases pertaining to
      Bhagat Singh us CIC (WP(C) No. 3114 of 2007) and B.S.Mathur us PIO of Delhi
      High Court /WP(C) No. 295 of 2011 and WP(C) 608 of 2011), though were
      submitted by applicant to the O/o Information Commissioner, the same were
      not provided to the undersigned before the hearing. Hence, the copies were
      taken physically after the hearing from the O/o Information Commissioner.
      After examining the same, it was understood that the judgments cited in both
      pertain to cases where 
Section 8(1)(h)
 was invoked mechanically without
      establishing a nexus with investigation or public interest. The facts of those
      cases are clearly distinguishable from the present matter, which concerns lawful
      Interception and national security-related assessments.



      In view of the submissions made hereinabove, it is respectfully submitted that
      the reply dated 23.09.2024 furnished by the undersigned, in the capacity of
      CPIO, is in accordance with the provisions of the 
RTI Act
. 2005. The exemptions
      under 
Sections 8(1)(g)
 and 
8
[1](h) have been correctly and judiciously applied,
      keeping in view the nature of the information sought, public safety, and national
      security implications. It is therefore respectfully prayed that the second appeal
      be dismissed and the reply of the CPIO be upheld."



Decision:



10.   The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the
      case, hearing both the parties and perusal of the records, observes that
      the CPIO initially invoked the exemptions under 
Section 8
 
1 (g)
 and (h) of
      the 
RTI Act
 mechanically without establishing a nexus with investigation.

      However, the Respondent during the hearing and vide written submission
      dated 14.01.2026 has explained in detail that why such exemptions were
      claimed by the CPIO at the relevant point of time and the Commission
      upholds the same.



11.   The facts and circumstances of the cases relied upon by the
      representative of the Appellant during the hearing are clearly
      distinguishable from the present case since the instant matter concerns
      lawful Interception and national security-related assessments.

CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715                                                       Page 7 of 13


 12.   It is pertinent to mention that the Appellant is seeking Minutes of Meeting
      of the Review Committee wherein interception done by various Law
      Enforcement agencies including the CBI and such recipient agencies, are
      exempt organizations under 
Section 24 (1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, and
      disclosure of information inextricably linked to such agencies through
      another public authority would defeat the legislative intent of the
      exemption. 
In this regard, the Commission relies upon a judgment of the
      Hon'ble High Court of Madras in a recent judgement in 
Gulab Singh Rana
      vs. CPIO, Indian Overseas Bank, WP No
 37231/2016 decided on
      08.12.2021, wherein the Court has held as under:




         "xxx....

         38. The petitioner requested for a copy of request letter received from CBI
         for seeking sanction, copy of internal office memorandum containing the
         opinion/views of Disciplinary Authority for giving sanction for prosecution,
         copy of first advice given by CVC, New Delhi, the outcome of the
         reconciliatory meeting between Disciplinary Authority and CBI office of the
         New Delhi, the copy of any further clarification sought for by the CVC, the
         copy of internal office memorandum containing the opinion/views of
         Disciplinary Authority for giving sanction for prosecution, the copy of latest
         correspondence from CVC requesting/advising the Bank, the copy of internal
         office memorandum containing the opinion/views of the present
         Disciplinary Authority and finally copy of draft sanction supplied by CBI.

         39. Considering the nature of questions sought for, interestingly, the first
         information is the request letter received from the CBI for seeking
         sanctioning. The said letter may have certain information pertaining to the
         investigation/interrogation. The second document is copy of internal office
         memorandum containing the opinion/views of the Disciplinary Authority.
         40 .This Court is of the considered opinion that note file, opinions, views of
         the Disciplinary Authority may vary from time to time based on the
         informations and based on the collection of facts and evidences. Even at
         later point of time, initial opinion may not be final opinion in many cases.
         Subsequent facts may provide a different views and opinion and therefore,
         if the copy of the opinion and views are supplied, it will create unnecessary
         hindrance for the peaceful investigation, interrogation and to proceed with
         the departmental disciplinary proceedings as well as the criminal
         proceedings. For example, on receipt of the preliminary report, the
         Disciplinary Authority would have formed certain opinions or expressed
         some views. However, those opinions and views cannot be construed as
         final, as far as the decisions to be taken. During subsequent period, if further
         documents are made available or certain other facts are placed, then the
         Disciplinary Authority may change his opinion or views. This is exactly the

CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715                                                      Page 8 of 13

         reason why, in disciplinary case, the rule contemplates opportunities to the
        delinquent officials. Therefore, the internal office memorandum containing
        opinion/views if supplied, undoubtedly, would create unnecessary issues as
        the petitioner will certainly rely on the document for the purpose of
        destroying the case. However, any accused/delinquent officials is entitled to
        defend his case in the manner known to law.

        41. Thus, furnishing of such opinions and views of the Disciplinary Authority
        at various stages, if provided under the 
RTI Act
, then it will hamper the
        continuation of the disciplinary proceedings and further, disrupt the
        investigation to be conducted by the investigating agency.

        42. Perusal of other documents and informations sought for by the
        petitioner are all relatable to the reconciliatory meeting between the
        officials. Clarifications sought for by the CVC, latest correspondence etc., of
        such informations and documents sought for reveals that it is between the
        authorities and more so, relating to views/opinions, internal
        correspondences etc.,

        43. No doubt, all such correspondences are protected under 
Section 8
 of the
        RTI Act. However, it is the "subjective satisfaction" of the authorities. The
        "subjective satisfaction" must be considered by the Public Information
        Officer, while complying with the request of the information seekers. This
        exactly is the purpose and object of 8(h) of the Act. "
Section 8(h)

        contemplates of information which would impede the process of
        investigation or apprehension or prosecution of offenders."

        44. Where the circumstances narrated under 
Section 8(h)
 on that
        informations, which would impede the process of investigation or
        apprehension or prosecution of offenders. Thus, if the information provided,
        would cause any hindrance to the investigation or apprehension or
        prosecution of offenders. The language employed is "Apprehension". Thus,
        "Apprehension" of the competent authority is also considered in the
        legislation. The word "Apprehension", no doubt, can be interpreted widely
        and further, it provides discretion to the authorities for forming an opinion,
        whether there is an "Apprehension" or not. In this regard, the subjective
        satisfaction of the competent authority is of paramount importance. The
        Public Information Officer is expected to consider in the event of furnishing
        such informations, which all are connected with the investigation or
        prosecution of offenders and providing of such informations, would impede
        the process, then, he is empowered to exercise power of discretion and
        reject the application of the information seeker. Thus, the scope of 
section
        8(h)
 is to be understood, with reference to the context and to the subjective
        satisfaction of the authorities competent. If the competent authority
        satisfied that there is a likelihood of impede the process of investigation or
        prosecution of offenders, then such informations or documents shall be
        denied.



CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715                                                     Page 9 of 13


         45. The purpose and object of the exemption clause is to ensure that the
        administrative confidentiality are protected and because of providing of
        information, the further continuation of investigation or prosecution cannot
        be impeded. This being the scope of exemption under 
Section 8(h)
, the
        questions sought for by the petitioner in the present case with reference to
        8(h) is to be considered.

        46. As discussed in the aforementioned paragraphs, the questions and
        documents sought for by the petitioner in the present case is relatable to
        internal office memorandum containing opinions/views of reconciliatory
        meeting between the Disciplinary Authority and CBI clarification sought for
        by CVC internal office memorandum containing opinions/views latest
        correspondences from CVC etc.,

        47. This Court is of the considered opinion that such informations, if
        provided, it will create unnecessary hampering of the Disciplinary
        Proceedings or the prosecution. Even an apprehension in this regard is
        sufficient is to deny information to the applicants. The word "Apprehension"
        is employed in the Act, so as to protect the prosecution and process of
        investigation, which should not be paralyzed at any circumstances in the
        public interest. When the investigation is undertaken, then the authorities
        must be provided with an amount of discretion for the purpose of culling out
        the truth in respect of the allegations. Thus, any hindrance in between,
        would undoubtedly paralyze the investigation process, which would dilute
        the prosecution and would extend unlawful benefit to the accused persons.

        48. The opinions and views formed by the competent authorities on every
        stage may vary or change depending on the progress made in the
        investigation and based on the further facts culled out from and out of the
        evidence. During the course of such investigation or prosecution, if
        information are provided regarding the opinions already formed, then
        undoubtedly the same will hamper further investigation and disrupt the
        prosecution to be conducted by the agency. If such nature of information or
        documents are provided, then it may not be possible to proceed with the
        prosecution for the purpose of establishing the offence.

        49. In this context, the rights of both the parties should be considered by the
        Courts. It is not only the right of the information seekers, but the right of the
        information provider must also be considered by this Court. Whenever a
        statutory right is conferred to the citizen, equally such right is conferred to
        the other citizen, whose interest is also to be protected before allowing a
        person to exercise such a statutory right. To elaborate, right and duties are
        corresponding terms, so also, rights can be exercised by any citizen,
        honouring the corresponding rights of the other citizen. It is exactly the
        constitutional perspective and the philosophy. Take a case, where
        information or documents are mechanically provided to the information
        seekers in all circumstances, then the right and duties of the investigating
        agency and the prosecutors are denied, establishing their cases before the

CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715                                                     Page 10 of 13

         competent Court of law or before the Disciplinary Authority. Thus, a
        balancing approach is required, while implementing the provisions of the
        
RTI Act
. It is not as if, an information seeker is entitled to get all information
        and documents including certain internal correspondences and views or
        opinions recorded by the competent authorities then and there and time to
        time. Therefore, practical and pragmatic approach coupled with rules of
        constructive interpretation is of paramount importance to take a decision in
        such circumstances. In the event of committing any lapses, the same would
        provide unlawful gain to the accused/delinquent persons, which would
        result in destruction of the prosecution or the case of the Disciplinary
        Authority and larger the public interest involved in the matter of criminal
        prosecution is also to be considered by the Court. State being the
        prosecutors, right of investigation, collected evidence, record the opinions
        and views in those files must be protected in all circumstances and by
        obtaining all such information and documents from the competent
        authorities, the accused may not be allowed to destroy the basis of
        prosecution as such views/opinions or internal correspondence can never be
        construed as final opinion/views or the final decision.

        50. Considering the fact that the Central Information Commission
        elaborately considered the grounds raised by the petitioner in the order
        passed in the Second Appeal, arrived a conclusion that the exemption
        granted to CBI from applicability of the 
RTI Act
, in terms of 
Section 24(1)

        would became meaningless. If RTI applicants would get information from
        another Public Authority, the very information that they cannot get from
        the CBI or information, inexplicably linked to the information and
        materials provided by the CBI to the Public Authority.

        51. The above findings of the Central Information Commission explicitly
        clarifies that what an information seeker could not able to get from the
        CBI, cannot attempt to get from his employer or from other agencies. Such
        calculated applications filed under the 
RTI Act
, at no circumstances, are
        entertainable. In the present case, the information and documents sought
        for are no doubt relating to the files being maintained by the CBI and
        about the investigation of the Criminal case, so also pertaining to the
        sanction, which all are relatable to investigation/interrogation or
        prosecution. Thus, the first proviso to 
Section 24(1)
 cannot be extended
        merely under the ground that the word 'Corruption' is employed in the
        Statute.

        52. Distinctions are to be drawn in this regard and 
Section 24(1)
 proviso
        must be read and understood along with the spirit of 
Section 8(h)
 of the
        Right to Information Act. Rule of constructive interpretation in such
        circumstances are imminent to ensure that the purpose and object of the
        
RTI Act
 is not defeated. So also at the time of providing information or
        documents, the rights of other parties and the criminal laws system of



CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715                                                      Page 11 of 13

          prosecution by the State is not affected or destroyed on account of
         providing such confidential information to the information seekers.

         53. In view of the principles considered by this Court in the
         aforementioned paragraphs, this Court is able to form a concrete opinion
         that the information and documents sought for by the petitioner are
         rightly rejected by the Public Information Officer, Indian Overseas Bank,
         First Appellate Authority and finally by the Central Information
         Commission/Second Appellate Authority."



13.   In the light of the above observations, the Commission upholds the
      written submission sent by the Respondent vide letter dated 14.01.2026
      which is more elaborate and is treated as updated reply but a copy of the
      same has not been sent to the Appellant. Accordingly, the Respondent is
      directed to send a copy of the same along with relevant annexures to the
      Appellant within one week of receipt of this order. No further action is
      required in the instant matter.



                          The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                            Jaya Varma Sinha (जया वमा िस ा)
                                     Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स ािपत ित)

(Ashutosh Vasishta)
Dy. Registrar
011- 26107042





CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715                                               Page 12 of 13

 Copy To:



The FAA,
M/o Communications and
Information Technology, Department
of Telecommunications, DDG(SPPI),
(SPPI-WING), 907, Sanchar Bhawan, 20,
Ashoka Road, Sansad Marg Area, New
Delhi-110001.



CIC/DOTEL/A/2024/651715                 Page 13 of 13


                                    Recomendation(s) to PA under 
section 25(5)
 of the RTI Act, 2005:-



                                   Nil




Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)