[Cites 
22
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Shristi Padia vs Reserve Bank Of India on 20 June, 2022


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                            के   ीयसूचनाआयोग
                      Central Information Commission
                          बाबागंगनाथमाग ,मुिनरका
                       Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                       नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीयअपीलसं या/Second Appeal Nos. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/623347
                                  CIC/RBIND/A/2021/128799

Ms. Shristi Padia                                     ... अपीलकता /Appellant
(CRIF High Mark Credit Information
Services Pvt. Ltd.)
                                    VERSUS
                                      बनाम
CPIO                                                       ... ितवादी/Respondent
RBI, Department of Non-Banking
Supervision Central Office, 2nd Floor,
Centre-1 World Trade Centre, Cuffe
Parade, Colaba, Mumbai-400005

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:-

                                                          SA       : 31-05-2021
RTI : 09-06-2020            FA     : 29-10-2020

                                                          Hearing: 05-07-2021,
CPIO : 01-10-2020           FAO : 30-12-2020              24-05-2021, 30-09-
                                                          2021 &13-06-2022

                                  ORDER

CIC/RBIND/A/2021/623347


1.    The above mentioned matter had been listed before the Commission for
hearing on 05-07-2021 and 24-05-2021, wherein the Commission made
following observations:-



      "The Commission directs the appellant o file their written submissions
      before the Commission within 2 days from the date of receipt of this
      order. The Commission further directs the original applicant to file
      written submissions. That a copy of the said written submissions filed by
      the parties should be shared with all the other parties to the case. In view

                                                                       Page 1 of 10

       of the above, the Commission adjourns the present matter and hearing of
      the case be fixed after 1 week."



CIC/RBIND/A/2021/128799


2.    The above mentioned matter had been listed before the Commission for
hearing on 30-09-2021, wherein the Commission made following observations:-



      "The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the
      case, and perusal of records, observes that the appellant bank has prayed
      for interim order restraining the CPIO from releasing the information in
      terms of prayer i.e., the appellant would suffer irreparable loss if the
      information is disclosed. In terms of the prayer, the second appeal is
      admitted and keeping in view of the urgency, the operation of the CPIO's
      reply dated 01.10.2020 and FAA's order dated 29.10.2020 is stayed till
      further orders. The matter may be posted for hearing as soon as
      possible."



3.     In view of the above, the aforesaid matters were thus adjourned and listed
today for further hearing.Since, the cause of action has arisen from the same
RTI application and orders of CPIO and FAA, therefore both the above matters
are clubbed together in the interest of justice.



Hearing:



4.     Adv. Gaurav Jangle (Counsel for the Appellant) attended the hearing
through video-conferencing. The respondent, Shri Vinod Kumar, Representative
of CPIO/Deputy General Manager attended the hearing through video-
conferencing. Shri Basant Soni (Original Applicant) attended the hearing
through video-conferencing

5.     The written submissions of the parties are taken on record.

6.     The Counsel for the appellant has referred the reply provided by CPIO
and order passed by the FAA and submitted that the CPIO, RBI and FAA had
violated the principles of natural justice, as they had not given any personal
hearing to the Appellant before passing their decisions in the matter. No reasons
were given for not offering personal hearing neither in CPIO's reply nor in
FAO. The appellant has filed the captioned Second Appeals challenging the
Order issued by the Ld. FAA, RBI as the Ld. FAA has failed to observed that
the applicant has sought disclosure of the said Inspection Reports which are
exempted under 
section 8
 of the RTI Act, 2005, more particularly 
section 8 (1)


                                                                       Page 2 of 10


 (a), 
section 8 (1) (d)
 and 
section 8 (1) (j)
 inter alia since the contents of the said
Inspection Reports sought to be disclosed contains extremely sensitive/
confidential information in relation to the business of the appellant including
trade secrets, its customers as well as details of the Appellant's commercial
transactions and details regards to Appellant's regulatory compliances, which
bear no relation with public activity and/ or larger public interest, and disclosure
of the same would cause prejudice to the Appellant and its competitive position
in the market and will also affect customer's confidence in the Appellant. The
disclosure of information sought will be violative of 
Article 14
 and 
Article 19
(1) (g)
 of the Constitution. 
The RTI Act
 was enacted to increase the
transparency and accountability in functioning of the public authorities. 
The
RTI Act
 does not apply to private entities such as the Appellant, as the
Appellant is not covered within the definition of "public authorities" as defined
under 
section 2 (h)
 of the RTI Act. It is further submitted that 
Section 14
 of the
Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 has specified the
functions of a Credit Information Company and accordingly the Appellant
collects, processes and disseminates the credit information to the banks and
financial institutions which are regulated by RBI for the purposes of mitigation
of risks of the said banks and financial institutions. The RBI in pursuance to

Section 12
 of the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005
conducts a detail inspection of the Credit Information Companies accordingly
prepares an inspection report which contains the certain observations and/ or
recommendations by the RBI which are vital and relevant for the business of the
Appellant.

7.     The Appellant has further submitted that the Ld. First Appellate
Authority ought to have considered that the 
Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2005
 was brought into force after the 
RTI Act, 2005
 i.e., with
effect from 14th December, 2006. It is significant to note that 
Section 28
 of the
Banking Regulations Act, 1949 came to be amended by the 
Credit Information
Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005
. Therefore, it is a clear indication that the

RTI Act, 2005
 cannot override the provisions mentioned in the 
Credit
Information Companies (Regulations) Act, 2005
. Further, the said 
RTI Act

cannot override and infringe the right to confidentiality and non disclosures of
the person/entity seeking credit information from the Appellant, especially
when there is a specific Agreement to protect the confidentiality and non-
disclosure of that person/entity.



                                                                           Page 3 of 10


 8.     The representative of the Reserve Bank of India while presenting their
case inter alia submitted that the applicant, Shri Basant Soni, vide above RTI
applications inter alia, sought, copy of Audit/ Inspection Reports from year
2007-2019 etc. They further submitted that the then CPIO issued the notice
under 
Section 11(1)
 read with 
Section 11(2)
 of the Right to Information Act,
2005 
(RTI Act
) to the third party i.e. appellant informing that RBI was required
to disclose the information sought by Shri Basant Soni, enabling appellant to
make written submission within 10 days from the date of receipt of the notice as
to whether the information sought by the applicant might be disclosed or not
along with reasons for the same. After considering the response from Appellant,
the CPIO decided to disclose the details of Audit/ Inspection Reports from year
2007-2019etc. to the applicant. He further submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in RBI vs. Jayantilal N. Mistry & Ors (2016) 3 SCC 525 observed that :-

       "RBI is clearly not in any fiduciary relationship with any bank. RBI
       ought to act with transparency and not hide information that might
       embarrass individual banks. It is duty bound to comply with the
       provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and disclose the information sought by the
       applicant."

The FAA duly considered the contentions of the appellant. FAA observed that
the interim order of the Supreme Court as quoted by the appellant was against
disclosure of inspection reports/ risk assessment reports etc. of banks including
State Bank of India and not of a credit information company like the appellant.
As such, it would not be possible for the appellant to take benefit of that order.
As regards, appellant's contention that it is not a public authority as defined in
the Act, FAA observed that RBI which holds information is a public authority.
RBI collects information from banks and other entities regulated by it, including
the appellant in exercise of its power under the relevant statute. Further due to
Covid-19 pandemic, their office was working with limited resources which
caused delay in providing reply/ issuing notice under 
section 11
 of RTI Act.

9.     The original applicant submitted that the respondent Reserve Bank of
India was duty bound to disclose the information sought by the applicant in his
above RTI applications as per Jayantilal Mistry case and in compliance of this
order should suo moto upload these reports under 
section 4 (1)
 of RTI Act. He
stated that the Reserve Bank of India was creator of reports and it acted as a
guardian of public interest. Therefore, as per the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme
Court of India dated 16.12.2015 and as per order dated 28.04.2021 complete
information should be disclosed to the RTI applicant. He stated that there was

                                                                       Page 4 of 10

 no ambiguity in Jayantilal Mistry's case and there was a larger public interest
in disclosing the information. 
He has further referred para no. 96 of one
judgment passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in "
Namit Sharma vs.
Union of India
" wherein it was held that:-




      "This takes us to discuss the kind of duties and responsibilities that such
      high post is expected to perform. Their functions are adjudicatory in
      nature. They are required to give notice to the parties, offer them the
      opportunity of hearing and pass reasoned orders. The orders of the
      appellate authority and the Commission have to be supported by
      adequate reasoning as they grant relief to one party, despite opposition
      by the other or reject the request for information made in exercise of a
      statutory right."



Therefore, they have followed the mandate of Hon'ble Supreme Court's
judgment while passing the orders. Further he has contested the delay caused by
the CPIO while issuing notice under 
section 11
 of RTI Act as well as by the
FAA while deciding the first appeal. He alleged that the notice under 
section 11

of RTI Act could have been sent through an email also; therefore the CPIO has
wilfully caused delay in completing the proceeding. He also submitted that after
the order passed in Jayantilal Mistry's case, there was no requirement of issuing
notice under 
section 11
 of the RTI Act. Therefore the CPIO has erroneously
sent notice under 
section 11
 of the RTI Act. He also alleged that the respondent
is in connivance with the third party, therefore an unreasonable delay has been
caused.



Decision:

10. The Commission, after hearing the submissions of both the parties and
after perusal of records, observes that the original RTI applicant has sought
information regarding copy of Audit/ Inspection Reports from the year 2007 to
2019. Further, he has asked to publish these reports on the website of the RBI in
terms of judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of RBI vs.
Jayantilal Mistry (
2016) (3) SCC (525) and Girish Mittal vs. Parvati
 vs.
Sundaram (2019 SCC Online SC 607).The CPIO, Reserve Bank of India had
issued notices under 
Section 11(1)
 and 
11(3)
 to the appellant intending to
disclose the information. Aggrieved by the decision of the CPIO, the appellant
had filed first appeal with the First Appellate Authority. The FAA had also
dismissed the first appeal of the appellant summarily.
 The Commission

                                                                       Page 5 of 10

 observes that the RTI applicant had insisted for disclosure of information as per
Jayantilal N. Mistry's case and as per 
section 4 (1)
 of RTI Act. The Appellant
contested that the information sought as a whole is exempted from disclosure
under 
Section 8 (1) (a)
, 
Section 8(1) (d)
 and 
8(1) (j)
 of the RTI Act. Despite the
Appellant's specific requests, no opportunity of personal hearing was provided
in the matter. The Ld. FAA has erred in concluding that it was not necessary to
provide personal hearing in the matter. This is a clear violation of principles of
natural justice.

11. The contention of the original applicant is that although the CPIO and
FAA has passed a reasoned order and the mandate of Supreme Court's
judgment duly considered while passing the order in the above RTI
Applications, but on every stage whether issuing notice under 
section 11
 of the
RTI Act or taking decision on response filed to the notice under 
section 11
 of
the RTI Act, the CPIO did not adhere with the prescribed time limits as per the
provisions of the 
RTI Act
. Even FAA took unreasonably long time in deciding
the first appeal and suo moto instead of disclosing information gave extra time
to file second appeal and made a suggestion to take stay order on disclosing the
requested information from the appropriate forum. He has further alleged that
considerable delay has been caused by the CPIO as he could sent the notice
under 
section 11
 of RTI Act through an email also, therefore he wilfully caused
delay in completing the proceedings. He objected to notice under 
section 11(1)

of RTI Act sent by the CPIO as bad in view of law laid down by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Jayantilal's case and other referred judgments. In response,
the RBI submitted that due to Covid-19 pandemic, they were working with
limited resources during that time; still they have expeditiously decided the
above RTI Applications. They had to provide reasonable time to the appellant to
file second appeal as per the principles of Natural Justice. Therefore, they have
provided reasoned and fair order while dealing with the above RTI Applications
in view of Jayantilal Mistry's case along with other judicial pronouncement of
Supreme Court.

12. The Commission observes that it is already a settled position in Jayantilal
Mistry's case that RBI is not fiduciary in relationship with the banks and
financial institution irrespective of these being public or private entities. These
Credit Rating Financial Institutions take transactional, financial & operational
data of clients to analyze their functioning and rate them within the broad
framework. Hence, inspection/ audit reports of these institutions will reflect on
such data of clients viz. credit & repayment history, names and information of
their operational and financial transactions etc, entrusted by the clients to their

                                                                        Page 6 of 10

 respective Credit Rating Financial Institutions which may get interspersed in
these reports and have to be examined in the light of para no. 77 of the same
judgment and various other judicial pronouncements protecting right to privacy
and protection of commercial interests. Therefore, the CPIO, Reserve Bank of
India has rightly invited objections but not expressed his reasoned view that to
what extent he is agreeing or disagreeing by the objections of the Appellant
while sharing the proposed redacted report for disclosure in some cases. The
Commission is of the view that these reports are not a simple set of information
as inspection and audit report consists of data about client including their credit,
financial & operational transactions etc, its analysis, judgment and observations
on the data provided by the clients as well as of institutions on their functioning,
regulatory compliance, deficiencies and strengths, suggestions for course of
correction, penal action as per provisions of the law etc., and may be much more
which the Commission may not be in a position appreciate in toto at this stage.

13. The Commission further noted the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
Reserve Bank of India V/s Jayantilal N. Mistry case clarifies that the
functional relationship between a regulator and a regulated entity is not
fiduciary. On the other hand the relationship is based on a statutory obligation to
ensure operational discipline and support remedial framework. Hence its
observations, guidance, directions or remedial actions are an outcome of own
functioning based on the analysis of the data shared by the regulated entity.

14. There are apparently two set of such information which has been shared
by the Credit Rating Institutions with the regulator under statutory obligation.
First is the information/data of clients relating to their business/commercial
operations, financial transactions, business and commercial strategy which is
shared by clients with financial institutions in full trust and confidence and is
held by them in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure under the 
RTI Act

in their hands. Second set is the information relating to business strategy,
decisions, transactions, other operational data etc. of financial institution which
may have bearing on their competitive position and also enjoys the exemption
from disclosure in their hands, even if it is a public authority or otherwise, under
the 
RTI Act
. The Commission is of the view that the exemption of disclosure of
certain information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of
financial institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in
good faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligations. This aspect
is not the ratio of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's judgment and
decision of the regulator to consider redacting such data/information while
disclosing the reports is to be aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts covering such aspects.

                                                                         Page 7 of 10


 15. The Commission further observes that by passing such orders simplicitors
shows non-application of mind but also ensure that their orders are may not be
questioned further with specific facts and points of law. Rejection or acceptance
of the specific objections raised by the appellant was not spelt out in the order
which have been passed without giving an opportunity of hearing to the
appellant.The Commission further observes that the CPIO is at best free to take
decisions on disclosure of information as per provision of 
RTI Act, 2005
 giving
a reasoned orders on the objections filed. The CPIO while issuing notice under

Section 11
 of the RTI Act has given the opportunity to the Appellant to file their
objections, if any, against disclosure of information sought but has not found it
necessary to give them an opportunity of hearing. While not doing so, the CPIO
has not passed any reasoned order covering his deliberations on their objections,
his understanding of law or jurisprudence in deciding specific objections, in
favor of disclosure etc. Order passed by the CPIO is cryptic, without any
reference to objections raised by the Appellant. Similarly, the FAA instead of
passing a speaking order has also given a cryptic order to the Appellant. The
CPIO and the FAA are expected to apply their mind before issuing the order of
intent of disclosing the information. Further, no opportunity of personal hearing
was given to the appellant nor speaking order have been passed by FAA for not
giving opportunity of hearing or elaborating reasons for accepting /not
accepting their objections in his decision in the appeal. The Commission is of
the view that every objection should be dealt and rejected/accepted with a
reason and reasons for not giving opportunity of personal hearing should be
well reasoned too in view of wider implications.

16. The Commission observes that rightful claims of the RTI applicant has to
be adjudicated in the light of specific objections filed by the Institution, various
judicial pronouncements of Hon'ble Supreme Court and High Courts providing
guidance on such matters. Opportunity of hearing should generally be provided
and orders passed by the CPIO and the FAA otherwise if denied or not given be
reasoned, speaking and clear. In the present case, order by CPIO should
enumerate the principles for disclosure or non-disclosure of inspection reports
or part thereof which may include personal information, commercially sensitive
information of clients or institution and hence specifically excluded disclosures
under various Acts, etc.

17. In light of the above observations and considering all the facts and
circumstances of the above mentioned cases, the Commission is of the view that
contour of the arguments are identical as held in the Full Bench judgment of this

                                                                         Page 8 of 10

 Hon'ble Commission passed in file no. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 & Ors.
vide order dated 05.05.2022. It has been observed that there are minor variations
in the matters in hand when compared with the matters already decided by the
Commission as above.

18. It has already been stated supra that detailed view in file nos.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 & Ors. dated 05.05.2022 wherein issues of
redaction, ratio of Jayantilal Mistry case and other related issues are discussed
in detail. Perusal of the relevant paragraphs in Jayantilal Mistry judgment make
it clear that the fundamental rights enshrined upon the citizens in form of right
to information are not absolute and that the right to information may not draw
precedence over right to privacy. Therefore, the Courts need to strike a balance
between the rights as well as protections guaranteed to a citizen under 
Article 19

of the Constitution. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held that the disclosure
of information relating to banks may be allowed taking into account the
circumstances and nature of information sought for and not in a blanket manner.
The Commission advised the CPIO to consider taking the relevant references
from the said order while deciding the above mentioned cases.

19. Further, the Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the
conduct of the CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the
opinion that due care has to be taken by according opportunity of personal
hearing and making reasoned order with reference to the objections in the hands
of the CPIO and later in the hands of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the
CPIO will be required to adjudicate such RTI applications in the light of the
observations of the Commission afresh. The Commission also expects that the
CPIO will take view on various objections filed by the Appellant and
submissions made by applicant to reach the decision in favor or against on case
to case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Jayantilal Mistry case, Commission's judgment dated 05.05.2022 and other
relevant judgments. Hence, with these observations the order passed by the
CPIO and FAA in these matters is set aside and the case is being remanded to
the CPIO for adjudication afresh in line with the Commission full bench
decision passed in file nos. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 & Ors. dated
05.05.2022. In case, the appellant/applicant is aggrieved with the order of the
CPIO, they are at the liberty to file first appeal before the First Appellate
Authority and afterwards second appeal before the Commission.

20. With the above observations, both the appeals are disposed of.



                                                                       Page 9 of 10


 21.   Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.



                                                             नीरजकु मारगु ा)
                                         Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरजकु       ा
                                                                सूचनाआयु )
                                      Information Commissioner (सू

                                                        दनांक / Date : 13-06-2022
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणतस यािपत ित)

S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा ),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),
(011-26105682)

Addresses of the parties:


1.    CPIO
      RBI, Department of Supervision
      Centre-1, World Trade Centre,
      Cuffe Parade, Colaba, Mumbai-400005

2.    Ms. Shristi Padia (Appellant)

3.    Mr. Basant Kumar Soni (Original Applicant)





                                                                      Page 10 of 10