[Cites 
33
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


George C. M. vs Director General Of Income Tax (Inv.) ... on 7 September, 2020


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                             के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                    Central Information Commission
                         बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                     Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                     नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या/Second Appeal No. CIC/DGITJ/A/2019/108256

George C. M.                                         ... अपीलकता /Appellant
                                    VERSUS
                                     बनाम
CPIO, O/o. The Income Tax Officer                      ... ितवादी /Respondent
(Exemption), Udaipur.

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:

RTI : Undated              FA    : 19-12-2018        SA       : 01-03-2019

CPIO : 22-11-2018          FAO : 22-01-2019          Hearing : 31-08-2020

                                  ORDER



1.    One Mr. D. Anburose filed an application under the 
Right to Information
Act, 2005
 
(RTI Act
) before the Central Public Information Officer (CPIO), O/o.
The Income Tax Officer (Exemption), Udaipur seeking following information:-

   1. "Whether the listed Society/Trusts have registered u/Section 12AA
      and U/
Section 80G
 of the Income Tax Act, 1961? If yes, please
      provide the copy of the same.

   2. Whether the listed society/trusts have filed its Income Tax Returns?

      If yes, please provide the copy of Income tax Returns along with the
      statement of accounts (Receipts & Payment, income & expenditure
      and balance sheets) and audit report (Form 10B) for the FY from
      2006-2007 to 2006-2017.

   3. Whether the listed society/trusts having business in the name of said
      society/trust? If yes, please provide the business proof of same.

   4. If the listed society/trusts having business, the income from their
      business accounted properly?

   5. Whether the listed society/trusts have received invested their funds in
      mutual funds/shares? If yes, please provide the details thereof.



                                                                    Page 1 of 14


    6. Whether the listed society/trusts have accumulated their funds?
       Then, please provide details of Form No. 10 submitted by the
       society/trusts.

   7. Most of the catholic organizations having hundies income from their
       church and also having local income by way of donations, corpus
       funds etc. Whether the listed society/trusts have accounted their local
       income properly?

   8. Whether the listed society/trusts have received any foreign
       contribution? If yes, please provide the details regarding utilization
       of foreign contribution.

   9. Whether the listed society/trusts have submitted their
       members/trustees PAN in their Income Tax Returns? If yes,
       members/trustees have filed their income tax returns? If yes, please
       provide the copy of income tax returns of members/trustee along
       with the statement of accounts.

   10.Whether the listed society/trusts income tax returns have been
       scrutinized by the designated assessing officer? If yes, please provide
       the copy of the assessment order along with the history of hearing
       posted."

2.     The appellant, Fr. George C. M. in the capacity of Secretary of the 'Catholic
Diocesan Society of Udaipur' has challenged the decision of the FAA wherein it
was decided to disclose the information to the original RTI applicant, Mr. D.
Anburose. At the first instance, the appellant had objected to the disclosure of
information vide letter dated 14-11-2018 which was overruled by the CPIO who in
turn decided to disclose the information vide letter dated 22-11-2018. Challenging
the decision of the CPIO, the appellant filed the first appeal dated 19-12-2018
against disclosure of information which was disposed of by the first appellate
authority on 22-01-2019. Thereafter, the appellant filed a second appeal u/
Section
19(3)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 before the Commission requesting for a direction to the
CPIO for not disclosing the information of the 'Catholic Diocesan Society of
Udaipur'.

Hearing:

3.     The appellant, Fr. George C. M. attended the hearing through audio
conferencing. Mr. Rajesh Bijawat, ITO(Exemption) participated in the hearing
representing the respondent through audio conferencing. The written submissions
are taken on record.

4.     The appellant argued against disclosure of information on the premise that
the 'Catholic Diocesan Society of Udaipur' is not a public authority and the


                                                                          Page 2 of 14

 information sought by the original RTI applicant, Mr. D. Anburose does not
involve any larger public interest.

5.     The appellant apprised the Commission that the 'Catholic Diocesan Society
of Udaipur' is a Society for the purpose of Christian Minority religious fulfillment
and the membership of the Society is restricted to only those priests who are
working in the Catholic Diocese of Udaipur. Therefore, information pertaining to
its Income Tax Returns including, inter-alia, statement of accounts and receipts,
payments, income, expenditure, balance sheet etc. as sought in the RTI application
need not be disclosed. He further asserted that such information lies with the
respondent in fiduciary capacity and is also private information which, if disclosed,
will cause unwarranted invasion of the privacy by their society. Therefore, the
disclosure is covered by the exemptions provided under 
Section 8(1)(e)
 and

Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. To support his contentions against disclosure
of information pertaining to income tax returns of the society, the appellant
referred to the judgment dated 03-10-2012 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India in SLP(C) No. 27734 of 2012 titled as 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande v.
Central Information Commission
 & ors., wherein, it was held as under:-


          "14. The details disclosed by a person in his income tax returns are
          "personal information" which stand exempted from disclosure
          under clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, unless involves a
          larger public interest and the Central Public Information Officer or
          the State Public Information Officer or the Appellate Authority is
          satisfied that the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of
          such information."

6.     Arguing in favour of disclosing the information, the respondent contended
that the 'Catholic Diocesan Society of Udaipur' is a society working for charitable
purposes and is accordingly enjoying tax exemptions under the 
Income Tax Act,
1961
. He further contended that it is also receiving funds in the form of donations
from Indians as well as from foreign donors. Therefore, there is larger public
interest in the matter in disclosing the information.
Decision:

7.     At the outset, the appellant has vehemently opposed the disclosure of
information pertaining to Income Tax Returns of the 'Catholic Diocesan Society of
Udaipur' including, inter-alia, statement of accounts and receipts, payments,
income, expenditure, balance sheet etc. The appellant has asserted for non-
disclosure of information on the premise that their society is not a public authority
u/
Section 2(h)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. On this point, it is to be noted that the original


                                                                            Page 3 of 14

 RTI applicant, Mr. D. Anburose had sought the information from the CPIO, O/o.
The Income Tax Officer (Exemption), Udaipur and, therefore, this Commission is
not adjudicating as to whether 'Catholic Diocesan Society of Udaipur' is covered
u/
Section 2(h)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. As such, the matter revolves around the
legality of disclosing the information in light of the applicable exemption(s) under
the 
RTI Act, 2005
. Expressing disagreement with the contentions put forth by the
appellant, the respondent has claimed that a larger public interest is involved in
disclosure of such information since the 'Catholic Diocesan Society of Udaipur' is
engaged in charitable activities for the welfare of the Christian minority and
accordingly, it is receiving funds in the form of donations from Indians as well as
from foreign donors thereby claiming tax exemptions under the 
Income Tax Act,
1961
.

8.     Upon hearing the averments of both the parties at great length and on perusal
of the available records, this Commission observes that in a similar matter where
information regarding charitable trusts claiming exemption u/
Section 12A
 of the
Income Tax Act, 1961 was sought, the Division Bench of the Commission in
Appeal No. CIC/BS/A/2016/001091-BJ-Final dated 05-01-2018 while observing
that the matter certainly involved larger public interest since the Government was
granting exemptions to the third party from payment of taxes allowed for
disclosure of information. In the said matter, it was observed as under:-

   "The Commission took note of the issue regarding the "personal information"

   held by an individual in its personal capacity and the personal information
   held by the entities/corporations/trusts in their private capacity. 
In this
   context, a reference was drawn on the Hon'ble Delhi High Court decision
   in 
Naresh Trehan vs. Rakesh Kumar Gupta and Ors.
( 2015) 216 DLT 156
   wherein it was held:


       "20. It has been contended by the petitioners that the expression
       "personal information" must also extend to information relating to
       corporate entities. Inasmuch as they may also fall within the
       definition of expression "person" under the 
General Clauses Act,
       1897
 as well as under the 
Income Tax Act, 1961
. However, I am
       unable to accept this contention for the reason that the expression
       "personal information" as used in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the Act
       has to be read in the context of information relating to an individual.
       A plain reading of the aforesaid clause would indicate that the
       expression "personal information" is linked with "invasion of privacy
       of the individual". The use of the word "the" before the word
       "individual" immediately links the same with the expression
       "personal information"

                                                                          Page 4 of 14


 21. Black's law dictionary, sixth edition, inter alia, defines the word
"personal" as under:- "The word "personal" means appertaining to
the person; belonging to an individual; limited to the person; having
the nature or partaking of the qualities of human beings, or of
movable property."

23. In my view, the aforesaid reasoning would also be applicable to
the expression "personal" used in 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act. The
expression 'individual' must be construed in an expansive sense and
would include a body of individuals. The said exemption would be
available even to unincorporated entities as also private, closely held
undertaking which are in substance alter egos of their shareholders.
However, the expression individual cannot be used as a synonym for
the expression 'person'. 
Under the General Clauses Act, 1897
 a
person is defined to "include any company or association or body of
individuals, whether incorporated or not". Thus, whereas a person
would include an individual as well as incorporated entities and
artificial persons, the expression 'individual' cannot be interpreted to
include such entities. The context in which, the expression "personal
information" is used would also exclude it application to large
widely held corporations. While, confidential information of a
corporation is exempt from disclosure under 
Section 8(1) (d)
 of the
Act, there is no scope to exclude other information relating to such
corporations under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the Act as the concept of a
personal information cannot in ordinary language be understood to
mean information pertaining to a public corporation."

22. A perusal of the above definition also indicates that the ordinary
usage of the word "personal" is in the context of an individual human
being and not a corporate entity. The U.S. Supreme Court has also
interpreted the expression "personal" to be used in the context of an
individual human being and not a corporate entity. In the case of
Federal Communications Commission v. AT&T Inc: 2011 US
LEXIS 1899 the US Supreme Court considered the meaning of the
expression "personal privacy" in the context of the 
Freedom of
Information Act
, which required Federal Agencies to make certain
records and documents publically available on request. Such
disclosure was exempt if the records "could reasonably be expected
to constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy". The U.S.
Supreme Court held that the expression "Personal" used in the
aforesaid context could not be extended to corporations because the
word "personal" ordinarily refers to individuals. The Court held that
the expression "personal" must be given its ordinary meaning. The
relevant extract of the said judgment is as under: "Person" is a

                                                                     Page 5 of 14

     defined term in the statute; "personal" is not. When a statute does not
    define a term, we typically "give the phrase its ordinary meaning,"

    [Johnson v. United States, 559 U.S., 559 U.S. 133, 130 S. Ct. 1265,
    176 L. Ed. 2d 1, 8 (2010)]. "Personal" ordinarily refers to
    individuals. We do not usually speak of personal characteristics,
    personal effects, personal correspondence, personal influence, or
    personal tragedy as referring to corporations or other artificial
    entities. This is not to say that corporations do not have
    correspondence, influence, or tragedies of their own, only that we do
    not use the word "personal" to describe them. Certainly, if the chief
    executive officer of a corporation approached the chief financial
    officer and said, "I have something personal to tell you," we would
    not assume the CEO was about to discuss company business.
    Responding to a request for information, an individual might say,
    "that's personal." A company spokesman, when asked for
    information about the company, would not. In fact, we often use the
    word "personal" to mean precisely the opposite of business related:

    We speak of personal expenses and business expenses, personal life
    and work life, personal opinion and a company's view."

Moreover, the Commission also examined the nature of fiduciary
relationship involved in the instant matter whereby the Respondent denied
the information of ITRs under 
Section 8(1)(e)
 of the RTI act, 2005. The
Commission referred to the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in 
CBSE v.
Aditya Bandhopadhyay
 (2011) 8 SCC 497 wherein it was held as under:


    "22...But the words 'information available to a person in his fiduciary
    relationship' are used in 
section 8(1)(e)
 of RTI Act in its normal and
    well recognized sense, that is to refer to persons who act in a
    fiduciary capacity, with reference to a specific beneficiary or
    beneficiaries who are to be expected to be protected or benefited by
    the actions of the fiduciary - a trustee with reference to the
    beneficiary of the trust, a guardian with reference to a
    minor/physically/infirm/mentally challenged, a parent with reference
    to a child, a lawyer or a chartered accountant with reference to a
    client, a doctor or nurse with reference to a patient, an agent with
    reference to a principal, a partner with reference to another partner, a
    director of a company with reference to a share-holder, an executor
    with reference to a legatee, a receiver with reference to the parties to
    a lis, an employer with reference to the confidential information
    relating to the employee, and an employee with reference to business
    dealings/transaction of the employer."

 Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court of Gujarat in Rajendra
 Vasantlal Shah vs. Central Information Commissioner and Ors. AIR

                                                                       Page 6 of 14

 2011 Guj 70 had observed that any statutory body/ Institution/association
meant to serve public good cannot claim to be working in a fiduciary
capacity, and held as under:

   "8.4. Respondent No. 4 is a religious charitable Trust, functioning
   under the Scheme formulated by the District Court, having
   considerable public importance and registered under the Bombay
   Public Trust Act, as a religious charitable Trust. Considering its
   nature and activities, emerging from the objects of the Trust, it can
   be stated that disclosure of such information is in relation to any
   public interest of activity. The Trust is engaged, in public activities,
   disclosure of its statements and accounts of income-tax returns and
   assessments orders cannot be withheld under 
Section 8(1)(e)
 or (j)of
   the 
R.T.I. Act
."

In this context, the Commission draws reference to the observations made
by the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 7265
OF 2007 (Date of Decision: 25th September, 2009) wherein the Court has
clarified the definition of "information under 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act,
2005 and held as under:

    "8. Information as defined in 
Section 2(f)
 means details or material
    available with the public authority. The later portion of 
Section
    2(f)
 expands the definition to include details or material which can
    be accessed under any other law from others. The two definitions
    have to be read harmoniously. The term ―held by or under the
    control of any public authority in 
Section 2(j)
 of the RTI Act has to
    be read in a manner that it effectuates and is in harmony with the
    definition of the term ―information as defined in 
Section 2(f)
. The
    said expression used in 
Section 2(j)
 of the RTI Act should not be
    read in a manner that it negates or nullifies definition of the term
    ―information in 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act. It is well settled that
    an interpretation which renders another provision or part thereof
    redundant or superfluous should be avoided. Information as defined
    in 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act includes in its ambit, the information
    relating to any private body which can be accessed by public
    authority under any law for the time being in force. Therefore, if a
    public authority has a right and is entitled to access information
    from a private body, under any other law, it is ―information as
    defined in 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act. The term ―held by the or
    under the control of the public authority used in 
Section 2(j)
 of the
    RTI Act will include information which the public authority is
    entitled to access under any other law from a private body.

    13. Information available with the public authority falls
    within 
section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act. The last part of 
section 2 (f)


                                                                     Page 7 of 14

      broadens the scope of the term information' to include information
     which is not available, but can be accessed by the public authority
     from a private authority. Such information relating to a private body
     should be accessible to the public authority under any other law.
     Therefore, 
section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act requires examination of the
     relevant statute or law, as broadly understood, under which a public
     authority can access information from a private body. If law or
     statute permits and allows the public authority to access the
     information relating to a private body, it will fall within the four
     corners of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act."

 Furthermore, the Commission referred to the observations made by Hon'ble
 Courts in the light of disclosure of information in "public interest", keeping
 in view the true spirit behind the promulgation of the 
RTI Act, 2005
, which
 are as under:

 
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in SLP(C) NO. 7526/2009
  (
CBSE & Anr. Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors
) had observed as
  under:


        "37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information
        and right to information are intended to be formidable tools
        in the hands of responsible citizens to fight corruption and to
        bring in transparency and accountability. The provisions
        of 
RTI Act
 should be enforced strictly and all efforts should
        be made to bring to light the necessary information under
        Clause (b) of 
Section 4(1)
 of the Act which relates to
        securing transparency and accountability in the working of
        public authorities and in discouraging corruption"

The High Court of Delhi in 
General Manager Finance Air India Ltd &
Anr v. Virender Singh, LPA No.
 205/2012, Decided On: 16.07.2012
regarding the disclosure of information for public interest, held:


  "8. 
The RTI Act
, as per its preamble was enacted to enable the
  citizens to secure access to information under the control of public
  authorities, in order to promote transparency and accountability in
  the working of every public authority. An informed citizenry and
  transparency of information have been spelled out as vital to
  democracy and to contain corruption and to hold Governments and
  their instrumentalities accountable to the governed. The said
  legislation is undoubtedly one of the most significant enactments of
  independent India and a landmark in governance."

The High Court of Bombay in Shonkh Technology International Ltd. v.
State Information Commission Maharashtra Konkan Region,
Appellate Authority and United Telecom Limited v. State Information


                                                                       Page 8 of 14

 Commission Maharashtra Konkan Region and Ors., W.P. Nos. 2912
and 3137 of 2011 decided on 01.07.2011 held as under:

     "
The RTI Act
 is an Act to provide for setting out the practical
     regime of right to information for citizens to secure access to
     information under the control of public authorities, in order to
     promote transparency and accountability in the working of every
     public authority. The preamble of the 
RTI Act
 itself refers to this
     aspect and the constitutional principles enshrined in several
     articles of the Constitution. It is very clearly postulated that
     democracy requires an informed citizenry and transparency of
     information which are vital to its functioning and also to contain
     corruption and to hold the Governments and their
     instrumentalities accountable to the governed. The revelation of
     information in actual practice is likely to conflict with other
     public interests including efficient operations of the
     Governments, optimum use of limited fiscal resources and the
     preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information.
     Therefore, the RTI Act seeks to harmonize these conflicting
     interests while preserving the paramount nature of democratic
     ideals."

 
Moreover, the purpose and object of the promulgation of the 
RTI
 Act,2005
 was to make the public authorities more transparent and
 accountable to the public and to provide freedom to every citizen to
 secure access to information under the control of public authorities,
 consistent with public interest, in order to promote openness, transparency
 and accountability in administration and in relation to matters connected
 therewith or incidental thereto. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
 the matter of 
Bihar Public Service Commission v. Saiyed Hussain
 Abbas Rizwi
: (2012) 13 SCC 61 while explaining the term "Public
 Interest" held:


 
"22. The expression "public interest" has to be understood in its
     true connotation so as to give complete meaning to the relevant
     provisions of the Act. The expression "public interest" must be
     viewed in its strict sense with all its exceptions so as to justify
     denial of a statutory exemption in terms of the Act. In its common
     parlance, the expression "public interest", like "public purpose", is
     not capable of any precise definition. It does not have a rigid
     meaning, is elastic and takes its colour from the statute in which it
     occurs, the concept varying with time and state of society and its
     needs (
State of Bihar v. Kameshwar Singh
([AIR 1952 SC 252]). It
     also means the general welfare of the public that warrants


                                                                       Page 9 of 14

       recognition and protection; something in which the public as a
      whole has a stake [Black's Law Dictionary (8th Edn.)]."


It is noted that certain issues have been raised in the RTI application which
relate to disclosure of property details of the Public Charitable Trust that
categorically works for the public welfare. Moreover, during the course of
the hearing it was categorically stated by the Respondent that registration
under 
Section 12A
 of the IT Act, 1961 was granted to the Third Party and
that they were claiming several exemptions/benefits under the said Act.
Therefore it is apparent that the matter certainly involved larger public
interest since the Government was granting several exemptions to the Third
Party from payment of taxes hence there ought to exist transparency and
accountability on the activities of the Third Party. Also, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India in the decision of R.B.I. and Ors. V. Jayantilal
N. Mistry and Ors, Transferred Case (Civil) No. 91 of 2015 (Arising out of
Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 707 of 2012 decided on 16.12.2015, while
dealing with significance of free flow of information had stated as under:

           "The ideal of 'Government by the people' makes it necessary
           that people have access to information on matters of public
           concern. The free flow of information about affairs of
           Government paves way for debate in public policy and fosters
           accountability in Government. It creates a condition for 'open
           governance' which is a foundation of democracy."

The Commission further referred to the full bench decision of the CIC in File
No. CIC/LS/A/2009/00190 dated 09.03.2010 wherein the CIC had decided on
the issue of disclosure of information by the public charitable trusts as under:

         "10. We have given a serious thought to the matter. We have also
         taken note of the pre-amble of the 
RTI Act
 which aims at
         promoting transparency and accountability in the working of the
         every Public Authority. In this context, it would be apt to advert to
         sub 
section 15
 of 
section 2
 of the IT Act which defines "charitable
         purpose". This sub section is extracted below:-

         "15. 'Charitable purpose' includes relief of the poor, education,
         medical relief and advancement of any other object of general
         public utility. Needless to say, avowed purpose for which these
         institutions/entities come into existence is charity. Charity and
         secrecy are contradiction in terms. Any charitable institution
         should have no secrets and should be open to public for all
         purposes, including its finances. In other words, in our opinion, it
         will be in the larger public interest if the identity of the charitable
         trusts/institutions/entities which are granted exemption from
         income tax under the statutory provisions are placed in the public
         domain. Hence, in exercise of powers under 
section 25(5)
 of the

                                                                       Page 10 of 14


RTI Act
, we hereby recommend that the identity of the charitable
    trusts/institutions/entities which have been granted exemption
    from income tax under 
section 10
 & under 
section 11
/
12
 of the
    Income Tax Act is placed in public domain by way of suo- motu
    disclosure by the CBDT in terms of 
section 4(1)(b)
 r/w 
section
    4(2)
 of the RTI Act."

The above mentioned decision of the CIC had been referred in File no.
CIC/RM/A/2014/004628 (dated 23.12.2016) File no. CIC/RM/A/2014/
003758/BS/9478 (dated 11.01.2016) and File No. CIC/DS/A/2012
/000688/RM (dated 10.04.2013). The Commission felt that the Supreme
objective/motive with which the Central/State Information Commission
were constituted were to set out the practical regime of right to
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control
of public authorities, in order to promote transparency and accountability
in the working of every public authority. In the light of the preamble of
the 
RTI Act, 2005
 there are several exemptions carved out under 
Section
8
 of the RTI Act, 2005 which can be used by a Public Authority to deny
information depending on the facts and circumstances of each case. The
purpose of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 is transparency and accountability in the
functioning of entities which impact citizens' daily lives. Recognizing the
significance of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 in empowering people with the means
to scrutinize government action, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in its
judgment delivered by Justice Ravindra Bhat in Indian Olympic
Association -Vs- Veerish Malik and others, (WP)(C) No. 876/2007 had
held as below:-

    "
The Act
 marks a legislative milestone in the post independence era
    to further democracy. It empowers citizens and information
    applicants to demand and be supplied with information about public
    records. Parliamentary endeavor is to extend it also to public
    authorities which impact citizens daily lives. 
The Act
 mandates
    disclosure of all manner of information and abolishes the concept of
    locus standi of the information applicant; no justification for
    applying (for information) is necessary; decisions and decision
    making processes, which affect lives of individuals and groups of
    citizens are now open to examination. Parliamentary intention
    apparently was to empower people with the means to scrutinize
    government and public processes, and ensure transparency. At the
    same time, the need of society at large, and Governments as well as
    individuals in particular, to ensure that sensitive information is kept
    out of bounds have also been accommodated under the Act."

Furthermore, the Commission observed that a voluntary disclosure of all
information that ought to be displayed in the public domain should be the

                                                                  Page 11 of 14

      rule and members of public who having to seek information should be an
     exception. An open government, which is the cherished objective of
     the 
RTI Act
, can be realised only if all public offices comply with
     proactive disclosure norms. 
Section 4(2)
 of the RTI Act mandates every
     public authority to provide as much information suo-motu to the public at
     regular intervals through various means of communications, including the
     Internet, so that the public need not resort to the use of 
RTI Act
. The
     Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of 
CBSE and Anr. Vs.
     Aditya Bandopadhyay and Ors
 2011 (8) SCC 497 held as under:


        "37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and
        right to information are intended to be formidable tools in the hands
        of responsible citizens to fight corruption and to bring in
        transparency and accountability. The provisions of 
RTI Act
 should
        be enforced strictly and all efforts should be made to bring to light
        the necessary information under Clause (b) of 
Section 4(1)
 of the Act
        which relates to securing transparency and accountability in the
        working of public authorities and in discouraging corruption."

The Commission also observes the Hon'ble Delhi High Court ruling in WP (C)
12714/2009 
Delhi Development Authority v. Central Information Commission and
Another
 (delivered on: 21.05.2010), wherein it was held as under:


        "16. It also provides that the information should be easily accessible
        and to the extent possible should be in electronic format with the
        Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information
        Officer, as the case may be. The word disseminate has also
        been defined in the explanation to mean - making the information
        known or communicating the information to the public through
        notice boards, newspapers, public announcements, media broadcasts,
        the internet, etc. It is, therefore, clear from a plain reading of 
Section
        4
 of the RTI Act that the information, which a public authority is
        obliged to publish under the said section should be made available to
        the public and specifically through the internet. There is no denying
        that the petitioner is duty bound by virtue of the provisions
        of 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act to publish the information indicated
        in 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and 
4(1)(c)
 on its website so that the public have
        minimum resort to the use of the 
RTI Act
 to obtain the information."

 
Furthermore, High Court of Delhi in the decision of 
General Manager
    Finance Air India Ltd & Anr v. Virender Singh, LPA No.
 205/2012,
    Decided On: 16.07.2012 had held as under:


        "8. 
The RTI Act
, as per its preamble was enacted to enable the
        citizens to secure access to information under the control of public
        authorities, in order to promote transparency and accountability in
        the working of every public authority. An informed citizenry and

                                                                       Page 12 of 14

          transparency of information have been spelled out as vital to
         democracy and to contain corruption and to hold Governments and
         their instrumentalities accountable to the governed. The said
         legislation is undoubtedly one of the most significant enactments of
         independent India and a landmark in governance. The spirit of the
         legislation is further evident from various provisions thereof which
         require public authorities to:

         A. Publish inter alia:

         i) the procedure followed in the decision making process;

         ii) the norms for the discharge of its functions;

         iii) rules, regulations, instructions manuals and records used by its
         employees in discharging of its functions;

         iv) the manner and execution of subsidy programmes including the
         amounts allocated and the details of beneficiaries of such
         programmes;

         v) the particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or
         authorizations granted. [see 
Section 4(1) (b)
, (iii), (iv), (v); (xii) &

         (xiii)].

         B. Suo moto provide to the public at regular intervals as much
         information as possible [see 
Section 4(2)
]."

9.     In light of the factual matrix of the instant case and the legal principles
enunciated in the aforesaid case-laws, this Commission comes to the conclusion
that there is larger public interest in the matter in disclosing the sought for
information in respect of 'Catholic Diocesan Society of Udaipur' since it is
engaged in charitable purpose which demands greater degree of transparency and
accountability, as tax exemptions are being claimed from the government. It is not
the case where information of an individual is being asked for. If the tax benefits
are being claimed by 'Catholic Diocesan Society of Udaipur' on the premise of
being a charitable institution, there is no harm in disclosing its income tax returns
keeping in view larger public interest. Therefore, this Commission does not find
any merit in the arguments advanced by the appellant regarding non-disclosure of
the sought for information in respect of 'Catholic Diocesan Society of Udaipur'.
However, income tax returns of individual members need not be disclosed since it
has the trappings of personal information distinct from the income tax details of
'Catholic Diocesan Society of Udaipur'. Accordingly, the decision of the CPIO as
well as the FAA is being upheld except to the extent of income tax returns of
individual members as sought on point no. 9. In view of this, no further
intervention of the Commission is required in the matter.

10. With the above observations, the appeal is disposed of.

                                                                         Page 13 of 14


 11.   Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.


                                                               नीरज कु मार गु ा)
                                           Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरज           ा
                                        Information Commissioner (सूसूचना आयु )
                                                      िदनां क / Date: 31-08-2020
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)

S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),(011-26105682)



Addresses of the parties:

1.    The CPIO
      O/o. The Income Tax Officer-(Exemption),
      Ward-Udaipur, Nodal CPIO, RTI Cell, 3rd
      Floor, Income Tax Office, Sub-City Centre,
      Savina, Distt-Udaipur, Rajastahan.

2.    George C.M.





                                                                      Page 14 of 14