[Cites 
19
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Pankajkumar Bhailalbhai Patel vs Department Of Revenue on 27 December, 2022


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/DOREV/A/2021/611383

Pankajkumar Bhailalbhai Patel                             ......अपीलकता /Appellant


                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम
CPIO,
Department of Revenue,
Ministry of Finance, 5th Floor
NDMC Building, Yashwant Place,
New Delhi- 110021                                    .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                     :   31/08/2022
Date of Decision                    :   16/12/2022

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :              Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on            :   22/10/2020
CPIO replied on                     :   04/11/2020
First appeal filed on               :   23/11/2020
First Appellate Authority's order   :   23/12/2020
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated          :   26/03/2017

Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an online RTI application dated 22.10.2020 seeking the
following information:

1. "Certified copy of the application submitted by applicant Foster Wheeler (G.B.)
Limited, (FWGB).



                                          1


 2. Certified copy of affidavit submitted by the applicant Foster Wheeler (G.B.)
Limited, (FWGB) with respect to affidavit explaining the nature of services
provided by Foster Wheeler Energy Limited, UK (FWEL) to the India project office.

3. Certified Copies of the all the invoices issued to FWEL submitted during this
proceedings.

4.Certified Copies of all the documents submitted by applicant in this
proceedings."



The CPIO furnished a point wise reply and denied information to the appellant on
04.11.2020 stating as follows:-



       "The requisite information is in the nature of commercial confidence, trade
secrets/ intellectual property, the disclosure of which would harm the competitive
position of the applicant and therefore exempt from disclosure in terms of 
Section
8(d)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005. Further, the proceedings before the
Authority are not open to public as per Rule 24 of the Authority for Advance
Rulings (Procedure) Rules, 1996."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 23.11.2020. FAA's order
dated 23.12.2020 observed as under:



       "4. The CPIO vide his communication F.No.124/AARNC/FAA/2020-21dated
04.11.2020 had denied to provide documents sought by the Appellant. The CPIO
contended that the information sought by the Appellant was in the nature of
commercial confidence, trade secrets/intellectual property, the disclosure of which
would harm the competitive position of the applicant and therefore exempt from
disclosure in terms of 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005. The
CPIO had further maintained that the proceedings before the Authority were not
open to public as per Rule 24 of the Authority for Advance Rulings (Procedure)
Rules, 1996. The Appellant in his appeal has submitted the following issues for
decision:



      i. Whether the information sought by the Appellant is exempt under 
Section
8(1)(d)
?

      ii. Whether Rule 24 of Authority for Advance Rulings (Procedure) Rules,
1996 restricts disclosure of the information sought by the Appellant?

      iii. Whether the information sought has larger Public Interest?



       4.1 The Authority for Advance Rulings is a high-level body headed by a
retired judge of Supreme Court or Chief Justice of a High Court which is

                                         2

 empowered to issue rulings which are binding both on the income-tax Department
and the applicant. This Authority is a quasi-judicial body having full power of a civil
court under the 
Income Tax Act
 to give its rulings in respect of complex questions
of law or fact eliminating long drawn litigations. As per the procedure laid down
under Authority for Advance Rulings (Procedure) Rules, 1996, the content of the
application are not disclosed to unauthorised persons. Only the applicant and the
concerned Commissioner are permitted to attend the proceedings. Rule 24 of
Authority for Advance Rulings (Procedure) Rules, 1996 specifically lays down that
the proceedings are not open to the public. Further Rule 22 of the Authority for
Advance Rulings (Procedure) Rules, 1996 allows inspection of documents only to
the applicant or the Commissioner or an authorized representative. However, they
are allowed to inspect only those documents which have been relied upon in the
proceedings before the Authority. The inspection is allowed only in presence of an
officer of the Authority and the applicant may be permitted to take notes of
inspection but not take copies of any documents. Thus the documents filed with
the Authority are treated as confidential in order to protect the privacy of
applicants. Even internationally, confidentiality of proceedings and publication is
practiced in varying degree. 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act exempts disclosure of
information Including commercial confidence, trade secrets or intellectual
property, the disclosure of which would harm the competitive position of a third
party, unless the competent authority is satisfied that larger public interest
warrants the disclosure of such information. The application filed before the
Authority and the supporting documents contain information which is of the
nature of commercial confidence and trade secrets the disclosure of which may
harm their competitive position. Thus, I find that the information sought by the
Appellant is exempt under 
Section 8(1)(d)
.



       4.2. When it is established that the information sought by the Appellant are
exempt under 
Section 8(1)(d)
, the next step is to examine whether larger public
interest would be served if disclosure of such information is allowed. The Appellant
has contended that the information sought is related to a big contract of worth
around Rs. 2 crore given by IOCL, a PSU to Foreign Country and the issue is related
to the relaxation to the tax liability of a foreign company and the process of giving
relaxation in tax liability to the foreign country primarily falls under the bonafide
right of the citizens of India to scrutinize the process of such relaxation and at the
same time the public authority is under statutory obligation to allow the public
scrutiny. While going through the provisions of the Advance Rulings I find that
non-resident applicants and resident applicants having transactions with a non-

resident can apply for advance rulings under 
Section 245N
 of the Income Tax Act,
1961. Moreover, most of the transactions where the advance rulings are sought

                                          3

 are high value transactions. Thus, the contention that scrutiny of relaxation in tax
liability given to a foreign company would qualify as larger public interest does not
appear to be justifiable as most of the rulings passed by the Authority would fall
under the said category. If such contention is accepted then all proceedings of
international taxations where advance rulings have been sought would be liable
for disclosure of confidential information leading to invasion of tax-payers'
privacy. Thus, the Appellant has not provided sufficient grounds to support his
contention that disclosure of information would be in larger public interest.
Moreover, as per Rule 25 of the Authority for Advance Rulings (Procedure) Rules,
1996 only those rulings are published which the Chairman of the Authority deems
fit for publication. The ruling AAR.No.1003 of 2010 dated 10.08.2016 was
published keeping in mind the larger public interest and the issue of relaxation of
tax liability has been discussed in the order and published for scrutiny of public. It
needs to be appreciated that the Authority for Advance Rulings holds the
information supplied by the applicants as a trustee in order to adjudicate the
matter and provide advance rulings in complex matters of taxation. It is a
mechanism for ease of doing business where the applicants can approach the
Authority on its own volition and seek clarity on law and facts related to their
proposed or ongoing transactions. The provisions of Authority for Advance Ruling
(Procedure) Rules, 1996 intend to ensure that information trusted upon the
Authority is maintained confidentially. I thus find that the Appellant has not been
able to establish a case of larger public interest.



       4.3. The Appellant has further submitted that 
Section 22
 of the RTI Act
enumerates that the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 shall have effect notwithstanding
anything against it, as mentioned in 
Official Secrets Act, 1923
 or any other law for
the time being or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any other law. He
has argued that the CPIO has attempted to withhold the information at any cost
by invoking Rule 24 of Authority for Advance Ruling (Procedure) Rules, 1996. He
has further contended that invoking this rule CPIO should have read 
Section 22
 of
RTI Act, 2005. The plain reading of the 
RTI Act
 leads to the understanding that the
non-obstante clause of the 
RTI Act
 does not mean an Implied repeal of Authority
for Advance Ruling (Procedure) Rules, 1996. It only has an overriding effect in case
of inconsistency. I do not find any inconsistency between the provisions of the 
RTI
Act
 and the Rules laid down under Authority for Advance Ruling (Procedure) Rules,
1996, 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act provides for exemption from disclosure of
information if the Information sought includes commercial confidence, trade
secrets or Intellectual property, the disclosure of which would harm the
competitive position of a third party. Rule 24 of Authority for Advance Ruling
(Procedure) Rules, 1990 lays down that the proceedings before the Authority shall

                                          4

 not be open to public and no person, other than the applicant, the Commissioner
or their authorised representatives shall, without the permission of the Authority,
remain present during such proceedings. This provision envisages safeguarding
the commercial confidence and trade secret of the applicant seeking advance
rulings in respect of their business transaction. Thus the provisions of Rule 24 of
Authority for Advance Ruling (Procedure) Rules, 1996 are in harmony with the
provisions 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act and are therefore not inconsistent.



       4.4. The Appellant as also argued that It Is necessary that when Information
Is denied based on the provision of 
Section 8
, the parson denying the Information
must give his subjective assessment that such information would be denied to
Parliament or State legislature if sought. I find that the Appellant has tried to give
overriding reach to the first proviso to 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act, The Parliament has
in its wisdom, visualized certain exemptions and 
Section 8
 lists those exemptions;
it opens with a non obstante clause, signifying the intention that irrespective of
the rights of the information seeker, in regard to matters listed under that
provision, the information providers can Justifiably withhold access to the
information seeker the record, information or queries sought for by him, if the
legislative intent was to give overriding reach to the proviso of 
Section 8
 the
exemptions provided in the aforementioned section would not have any meaning.
As for exemption provided at 
Section 8(1)(d)
 the test of larger public interest Is
paramount which the Appellant has not been able to establish in his favour.



      5. Based on the above discussions I find that the CPIO has been correct In
holding that the information sought by the applicant are exempt under 
Section
8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act."



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present through audio conference.

Respondent: Mukesh, Sr.PPS & CPIO present through audio conference.
The Appellant reiterated most of the contents of his written submissions dated
31.08.2022 as well as the grounds of the Second Appeal, relevant portions of
which are reproduced hereunder:



                                          5


        "A. Regarding invoking 
Section 8(1)(d)
 for denying Information in this
instant Case.

       In this instant case, it's a pre-decided & motivated denial of the information
i.e. denial of fundamental Right of citizen by most of public authorities in such
cases!! Instead of working proactively for the Transparency & Good governance,
finding the ways to deny the legitimate fundamental rights of the citizens by
picking up convenient excuses in the name of empty justification by invoking of in-
appropriate exception clauses and the precedents. Thinking that what will do a
helpless, poor citizen alone? And at the same time looking to the unfortunate
condition of the Backlogs of Appeals of RTIs with CIC & Judiciary will take several
years to decide, so nothing will be happened to their accountability/responsibility.
It is most pertinent here to be mentioned that the information I sought in this
subjected RTI, I already sought earlier from the department of revenue and it is to
be looked upon the response of the public authority that what they have done
with my Right to Information. I am providing information of the same with this
submission.

       I. I filed RTI online with registration No. DOFSR/R/2019/50696 dated
29/05/2019,
       II. The same was transferred to the concerned CPIO by Nodal Officer with
new Registration No. DOREV/R/2019/80595 on 29/05/2019.

       III. The CPIO, Department of revenue has transferred the RTI to CBDT with
new registration No. CBODT/R/2019/80790 on the same date i.e. 29/05/2019.

       IV. Then the CPIO, CBDT re-transferred my RTI to Department of revenue
with new Registration No. DOREV/R/2019/80638 on 11/06/2019.

       V. Again, the CPIO, Department of Revenue has re-transferred my RTI to
CBDT with new registration No. CBODT/R/2019/80843 on 12/06/2019.

       VI. Then Then the CPIO, CBDT Transferred to Principal Chief Commissioner
of Income Tax (CCA), Chennai on 25/06/2019 with new registration No.
CCACH/R/2019/80054.

       VII. Then the Principal Chief Commissioner of Income Tax (CCA),Chennai has
transferred my RTI Physically to IT Officer (Hq), O/oCIT (Transfer Pricing), Chennai.

       VIII. Finally, the information has not been provided by the public authority.
       IX. The fact is that there was not at all any relation to the information I had
sought in my RTI with the Chennai Income Tax Offices.



       The appellant prays before the Hon'ble CIC that the principle of natural
justice be followed and it is to be decided first that the information, the appellant
sought in RTI, how it falls under 
section 8(1)(d)
? as it is by basic legal right to know
under the principle of Natural Justice.



                                           6


       XXX

       C. Regarding invoking Rule No. 24 of The Authority for Advance Rulings
(Procedures)Rules 1996 for denying Information in instant case.

       Here I relied on two important judgements and 
Finance Act
 2021:

       I. The CIC judgement of Full Bench in Appeal No. CIC/AT/A/2006/00586, Shri
Rakesh Kumar Gupta v/s Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT)
       II. The judgement of the Apex Court, The Supreme Court of India in Civil
Appeal No. 1966-1967 of 2020 (Arising out of SLP(C) No. 5840 of 2015.

       III. The 
section 245W (1)
 of The Finance Act 2021, The applicant, if he is
aggrieved by any ruling pronounced or order by Board for Advance Ruling or the
Assessing Officer, on the directions of the Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner, may appeal to the High Court against such ruling or order of the
Board of Advance Ruling within sixty days from the date of the communication of
that ruling or order, in such form and manner as may be prescribed.

       According to the CIC judgement in Appeal No. CIC/AT/A/2006/00586, Shri
Rakesh Kumar Gupta v/s Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT), in Decision Notice
in para-No. 51, The 
Section 4(1)(d)
 applies to the Authority of Advance Ruling
(Income Tax).

       The Authority of Advance Ruling (Income Tax) is neither a tribunal nor a
court, it is only an administrative - quasi-Judicial Authority.

       In reference to the judgement of the Apex Court, The Supreme Court of India
in Civil Appeal No. 1966-1967 of 2020 (Arising out of SLP(C) No. 5840 of 2015,
There is no rule or any provision with The Authority of Advance Ruling (Income
Tax) for providing the certified copies of the proceedings & orders to the third
parties like the Rule No. 151 of the Gujarat High Court Rules, 1993."



Further, following contents of the Appellant's Second Appeal is also reproduced
here for clarity:



       "CPIO attempted to withhold the information at any cost by invoking Rule
24 of Authority for Advance Ruling (Procedure) Rules, 1996. These rules are limited
to the proceedings only. Before invoking this rule CPIO must read the 
Section 22
 of
RTI Act 2005. Act to have overriding effect - 
Section 22
 of the RTI Act expressly
provides that the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in the 
Official Secrets Act, 1923
, and
any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by
virtue of any law other than the 
RTI Act
. Then 
Section 24
, which mandates even
security and intelligence organizations to disclose information on corruption and
human rights.."

                                        7


       "The Information is having Larger Public Interest :



       Foster Wheeler (G.B.) Limited have been awarded services contracts by
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) for the Paradip Refinery Project, in Orissa
State in around year 2008. The contract was of around Rs. 2000/- crore. The
company applied to the AAR (income Tax) for considering some of expenses for
deduction from the income incurred by third party (A Group Company). The above
said ruling of AAR (Income-Tax) is highly suspected of error, abuse of power for
personal gain. The matter was of huge amount (Amount in Crores of rupees) of tax
relaxation to a Foreign Country. The proceedings at AAR(Income-Tax) was for the
interpretation of the law/rule of income tax, as the proceedings are over, the
order is published, no prosecution is pending then the basis of such ruling must be
available for the scrutiny which is the very basis of the 
RTI Act
-2005.



 
The RTI Act
 -2005 does not exempt files or information labelled
'confidential' as exempt. Classification as 'confidential' is an internal procedure
and cannot be used to deny information, since the 
RTI Act
 has not exempted this
category, there is either information which is exempted under 
Section 8
 or
information to be disclosed."



The CPIO reiterated the reply provided to the Appellant and emphasised on the
detailed FAA's order and relied on his written submissions sent prior to the
hearing wherein the following was stated inter alia-



       "4. (i) The scheme of advance rulings was introduced by the 
Finance Act,
1993
, Chapter XIX-B of the Income-tax, 1961 which deals with advance rulings,
came into force w.e.f. 01.06.1993. Under the scheme the power of giving advance
rulings has been entrusted to an independent adjudicatory body headed by a
retired Judge of Supreme Court or Chief Justice of a High Court which is
empowered to issue rulings which are binding both on the income-tax Department
and the applicant.

       (ii) The definition of "advance ruling" is given in Section 245N of the Income-
tax Act, 1961. A copy of the same is at Annexure-B.

       (iii) There is also a provision of rules to be followed while determining the
applications filed before the Hon'ble Authority which is called "Authority for
Advance Rulings (Procedure) Rules, 1996 (hereinafter referred to "AAR. Rules" . A
copy of the same is placed at Annexure-C.




                                          8


        (iv) As per Rule 5 of AAR Rules, the Authority shall hear and determine the
application made under sub-section (1) of 
Section 245Q
 of the Act and such other
applications, petitions and representations of on interlocutory, incidental or
ancillary nature as may be necessary for a complete and effective disposal of the
applications, as the Chairman may by general or special order direct.



     (v) As per Rule 7(3) of AAR Rules, the Secretary shall also have the following
powers and duties namely:-

            (i) to (viii) xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx

            (ix) to grant certified copies of the orders of the Authority to the
     parties

            (x) to grant certified copies of documents filed in the proceedings to
     the parties in accordance with the rules: and


      (vi) As per Rule 21(1) of AAR Rules the Secretary may order grant of
additional certified copies of documents or orders to the applicant or the
Commissioner on a written request made by either of them.



      (vii) As per Rule 22(1) of AAR Rules, the applicant or the Commissioner or an
authorised representative may be allowed to inspect the records of the case on
making an application in writing to the Secretary provided that only those
documents shall be allowed to be inspected which have been relied upon in the
proceedings before the Authority. Further Rule 22(2) says the inspection shall be
allowed only in the presence of an officer of the Authority and the applicant may
be permitted to make notes of inspection but not to take copies of any document.



         (viii) As per Rule 24 of AAR Rules, proceedings before the Authority shall not
be open to the public and no person, other than the applicant, the Commissioner
or their authorised representatives shall, without the permission of the Authority,
remain present during such proceedings. It shows that all proceedings held before
the Hon'ble Authority for determining the transaction/tax liability etc. as per the
mandate given under the 
Income-tax Act, 1961
 and AAR Rules be considered
confidential in nature and the documents, submissions etc. made by the parties
(i.e. Applicant and the Commissioner) during the proceedings or as per the
directions of the Hon'ble Authority be considered part and parcel of the
proceedings. To support this submission, the provisions of Rule 22 (1) of AAR Rules
i.e.....those documents shall be allowed to be inspected which have been relied
upon in the proceedings before the Authority be read with Rule 24 of AAR Rules.



                                          9


       (ix) As per Rule 25 of AAR Rules the orders of the Authority, as the Chairman
deems fit for publications in any authoritative report or the press, may be released
for such publication on such terms and conditions as the Chairman may specify.

Hence discretion of publications of orders lies with the Chairman only.



      6. That in support of submissions made by the then CPIO and First Appellate
Authority of respondent's office that proceedings shall not be open to the public
and no person, other than the applicant, the Commissioner or their authorised
representatives may be considered in the nature of confidential under Rule 24 of
AAR, a judgement of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in LPA No. 190/2012 is relied upon
wherein the provisions of 
Section 8(1) (d)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005
and the confidentiality of the documents sought by the appellant in that case have
been discussed. A copy of the same is placed at Annexure-D.


      7. That as regards on the issue of larger public interest, the submissions
given by the then First Appellate Authority at point no. 4.2 of the order dated
23.12.2020 is reiterated.



      8. That Annexure-VII containing Clause-8 of confidentiality between the
parties of the agreement filed by the applicant before the Hon'ble Authority is
relevant for consideration..."



Decision:



The Commission having heard the Appellant at length and upon perusing the
enormous facts on record observes that there is adequate material particularly,
the FAA's order to prove that the public authority has duly justified the denial of
the information under 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act by relying on the
confidentiality aspect of the averred records envisaged under Rule 24 of Authority
for Advance Rulings (Procedure) Rules, 1996. The FAA vide paras 4.1 to 4.4 has
threadbare dealt with each of the contentions of the Appellant against the
applicability of 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act; the rationale of reading Rule 24 of
Advance Rulings (Procedure) Rules, 1996 into the matter; the reason for
discrediting the claim of larger public interest argued by the Appellant. Taking cue
from the FAA's order, the CPIO has also discharged the onus of justifying the
denial of the information as required under 
Section 19(5)
 of the RTI Act, which
provides as under:



                                        10


       "(5) In any appeal proceedings, the onus to prove that a denial of a request
was justified shall be on the Central Public Information Officer or State Public
Information Officer, as the case may be, who denied the request."



Even as the CPIO & FAA have very well justified the applicability of 
Section 8(1)(d)

of the RTI Act, the Appellant's insistence that the CPIO should further justify the
right of the third party to the protection of the information related to its
commercial operations appears to be labored and bereft of merit.



Further, on the aspect of larger public interest, the Commission places reliance on
a catena of judgments of the superior Courts on the import of "public interest" as
under:



The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
Bihar Public Service Commission vs.
Saiyed Hussain Abbas Rizwi & Anr. [CIVIL APPEAL NO.9052 OF
 2012] observed as
under:




 
"23. The expression 'public interest' has to be understood in its true
connotation so as to give complete meaning to the relevant provisions of the Act.
The expression 'public interest' must be viewed in its strict sense with all its
exceptions so as to justify denial of a statutory exemption in terms of the Act. In its
common parlance, the expression 'public interest', like 'public purpose', is not
capable of any precise definition. It does not have a rigid meaning, is elastic and
takes its colour from the statute in which it occurs, the concept varying with time
and state of society and its needs. [
State of Bihar v. Kameshwar Singh
 (AIR 1952
SC 252)]. It also means the general welfare of the public that warrants
recommendation and protection; something in which the public as a whole has a
stake [Black's Law Dictionary (Eighth Edition)]. Emphasis Supplied
       "24. The satisfaction has to be arrived at by the authorities objectively and
the consequences of such disclosure have to be weighed with regard to
circumstances of a given case. The decision has to be based on objective
satisfaction recorded for ensuring that larger public interest outweighs
unwarranted invasion of privacy or other factors stated in the provision. Certain
matters, particularly in relation to appointment, are required to be dealt with
great confidentiality."


 
".... Similarly, there may be cases where the disclosure has no relationship
to any public activity or interest or it may even cause unwarranted invasion of
privacy of the individual. All these protections have to be given their due
implementation as they spring from statutory exemptions. It is not a decision

                                          11

 simpliciter between private interest and public interest. It is a matter where a
constitutional protection is available to a person with regard to the right to
privacy. Thus, the public interest has to be construed while keeping in mind the
balance factor between right to privacy and right to information with the
purpose sought to be achieved and the purpose that would be served in the
larger public interest, particularly when both these rights emerge from the
constitutional values under the Constitution of India." Emphasis Supplied
Similarly, in another judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
S. P.
Gupta v President of India
, [AIR 1982 SC 149], with reference to 'public interest' it
has been maintained that:




 
"Redressing public injury, enforcing public duty, protecting social, collective,
'diffused' rights and interests vindicate public interest... [in the enforcement of
which] the public or a class of the community have pecuniary interest or some
interest by which their legal rights or liabilities are affected." Emphasis Supplied

And, in the matter of 
State of Gujarat vs. Mirzapur Moti Kureshi Kasab Jamat &
others
 [Appeal (Civil) 4937-4940 of 1998], the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held
that:




      "the interest of general public (public interest) is of a wide importance
covering public order, public health, public security, morals, economic welfare of
the community, and the objects mentioned in Part IV of the Constitution [i.e.
Directive Principles of State Policy]". Emphasis Supplied

Since there is no material on record to ascribe larger public interest in the
disclosure of the information related to the averred third-party in any of the
above referred contexts, the Commission finds no reason to depart from the view
taken by the FAA.



Similarly, adverting to the arguments of the Appellant against putting forth the
provisions of Advance Rulings (Procedure) Rules, 1996 by the public authority for
justifying the denial of the information, the Commission draws the attention of
the Appellant to a judgment of the Division Bench of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court
in the matter of 
ASHOK KUMAR GOEL vs. PUBLIC INFORMATION OFFICER VAT
WARD NO
 64 & ANR in LPA 190/2012 dated 07.03.2012 that dealt with a similar
question of law as under:




                                          12


        "5. We have already reproduced the nature of information which the
appellant seeks. It is essentially related to the returns filed by the respondent
No.2's firm with the Sales Tax Commissioner and on the basis of which the
respondent No.2's firm has been paying the VAT. 
Section 98
 of the Delhi Value
Added Tax Act, 2004 makes such returns confidential and specifically stipulates
that all particulars contained in any statement made, return furnished or
accounts or documents produced in accordance with this Act, or in any record of
evidence given in the course of any proceedings under this Act, other than
proceedings before a criminal Court shall be treated as confidential and
notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
, no court
shall, save as aforesaid, be entitled to require any servant of the Government to
produce before it any such statement, return, account, document or record or any
part thereof, or to give evidence before it in respect thereof. Thus this provision
protects and insulates the persons filing such returns and even the Court is not
entitled to summon the records except when the proceedings are before a
Criminal Court or what is saved under Sub-Section (3) of 
Section 98
 of the Act. Not
only this, Sub-Section (2) 
Section 98
 of the Act provides for punishment with
imprisonment upon the government servant who discloses such information.
Emphasis Supplied

       6. Provisions of 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act are to be interpreted, in the
present context, keeping in view the provisions of 
Section 98
 of the Act. Provisions
of 
Section 8(1)(d)
 reads as under:

      "8 (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there shall be no
obligation to give any citizen,--

      (a) ...............

      (b) ...............

      (c) .....................

       (d) information including commercial confidence, trade secrets or
intellectual property, the disclosure of which would harm the competitive position
of a third party, unless the competent authority is satisfied that larger public
interest warrants the disclosure of such information."

       7. It is not in dispute that the information in the form of returns filed by
the respondent No.2's firm is in the nature of commercial confidence which is
clearly inferable from 
Section 98
 of the Act. Such information can be given only if
larger public interest warrants the disclosure of this information. All the
authorities below including the learned Single Judge has held and rightly so that

                                        13

 no public interest is at all involved in seeking of this information by the appellant
from the Sales Tax Commissioner." Emphasis Supplied
The foregoing contents further exemplify the fact that the Appellant in the instant
matter has misconstrued the purport of putting forth the relevant aspects of the
Advance Rulings (Procedure) Rules, 1996 to mean that 
Section 22
 of the RTI Act
will override the same, when in fact, the denial of the information is under

Section 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act and not under the Advance Rulings (Procedure)
Rules, 1996. In other words, 
Section 22
 of the RTI Act cannot negate the
confidentiality accrued within the meaning of the exemption of 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of
the RTI Act to the records of a third party.

Having observed as above, the Commission finds no scope of relief to be ordered
in the matter.



                      The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                     Saroj Punhani (सरोजपुनहािन)
                                                                           हािन)
                                          Information Commissioner (सूचनाआयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                         14