[Cites 
6
, Cited by 
4
]




Central Information Commission


Deepak Juneja vs Delhi Development Authority on 24 July, 2020


                    CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
                   August Kranti Bhawan, Bhikaji Cama Place,
                              New Delhi-110066

                                         F. No.CIC/KY/C/2016/000021-YA
                                               CIC/KY/C/2016/000022-YA
                                               CIC/KY/C/2016/000023-YA

Date of Hearing                     :   22.05.2017
Date of Decision                    :   22.05.2017

Appellant/Complainant               :   Mr. Deepak Juneja

Respondent                          :   Delhi Development Authority
                                        Through: Sh. M L Sharma, Asstt.
                                        Director/PIO; Sh. N C Bhatt, Dy.
                                        Director, OSB and Sh. Om Prakash

Information Commissioner            :   Shri Yashovardhan Azad

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on            :   20.01.2015
PIO replied on                      :   -
First Appeal filed on               :   03.06.2015
First Appellate Order on            :   -
2ndAppeal/complaint received on     :   21.03.2017

Since all the three appeals arise out of the single RTI Application, and
involve the same parties, all the appeals are being clubbed for the
purpose of adjudication.

Information sought
 and background of the case:

 An RTI application dated 20.01.2015 as detailed below was filed before the
 CPIO, Ministry of Urban Development [MoUD]:



 1. Information of all lands (whether residential, commercial, industrial,
 institutional, agricultural or any other), given on lease by the MoUD or any
 other agency, department, corporation etc. under it, where the leases have
 expired, and the leases which presently continue to be in possession of the
 lands in following format.



  Name of      Area     Address Amount of       Year when         Year of expiry
  lease        given on of the  lease rent      lease given       of lease.

               lease in land in (pm or pa)
                sq.m.     Delhi





 2. If this list is not available for expired leases, please provide the above
 mentioned details for all lands given on lease.



 3. Kindly provide complete office contact details of the PIO & FAA like Name,
 Office address, Landline number, office mobile number & email ID's.



 The RTI application was transferred by the CPIO, MoUD under 
Section 6(3)

 of the RTI Act to the Director, DDA; Director, Local Bodies and to the Land &
 Development Officer, L&DO on 30.01.2015. Records of the case reveal that
 Sr. Research Officer, DDA, RTI Implementation and Co ordination Branch by
 communication dated 03.03.2015 forwarded the application to the Dy.
 Director (Co ordination) Lands, who further marked it to the Dy. Director,
 OSB, CE,CL, LSB(I), GH, IL by communication dated 10.03.2015. Though
 the applicant was informed of the transfer of the application from one office
 to the other, frustrated with non receipt of any information, the applicant
 filed a First Appeal dated 03.06.2015, which was not decided by the FAA.
 Thus aggrieved with non disposal of his case and non receipt of information,
 applicant approached the Commission with the instant Complaint.



Relevant facts emerging during hearing:

Both parties are present for hearing and make detailed submissions.

 1. Chronology of events relating to the matter reveal that RTI application
     sent to the CPIO, MoUD on 20.01.2015 after being transferred twice,
     reached the Dy. Director (Co-ordination) Lands on 03.03.2015 who
     further transferred it to 10 PIOs including the PIO, Dy. Director, OSB,
     CE, CL, LSB(I), GH, IL, CS, LA, LAB(RO) and LSB(RO) by communication
     dated 10.03.2015. The OSB means Old Scheme Branch is an Unit of the
     Respondent which deals with properties relating back to the British era
     and those which were let out on perpetual lease/s to various parties in
     the pre-independence era. The FAA/Dy. Director of Lands sent a hearing
     notice to the applicant despite the fact that applicant had sought
     exemption from presence and requested that decision may be taken
     based on records. No order was received from the FAAtill the Complaint
     dated 17.08.2015 was filed before the Commission. This was followed by
     a communication dated 28.09.2015 received by the applicant from
     PIO/Dy. Director(OSB), DDA stating that information as sought by the
      applicant is not available in the compiled form or in the format asked by
     him and hence the same cannot be provided under the 
RTI Act, 2005
.



     On the other hand the CPIO(IL) vide letter dated 28.08.2015 informed
     that "all land leases given by Institutional branch are on perpetual lease
     basis and there is no society in respect of which lease deed has expired.
     However, queries number 2 and 3 relating to details like name of lease,
     when was lease given etc. were not answered by the CPIO, IL. Pursuant
     to filing of the Complaint before the CIC, the CPIO vide another letter
     dated 24.09.2015 informed the FAA that information has been provided
     to the appellant referring to the letter dated 28.08.2015. And the FAA
     disposed of the appeal dated 03.06.2015 by order dated 30.09.2015
     upholding the CPIO's reply. While the First Appeal was filed against 2
     CPIOs viz. CPIO(IL) & CPIO(OSB), the FAA passed the order only qua the
     CPIO (IL), without commenting on the CPIO(OSB) at all.



     The other response was received from CPIO, LSB-Rohini, after issuance
     of   CIC's    hearing     notice    dated   15.03.2016      whereby    the
     Respondent/CPIO(LSB-RO) by a letter dated 05.04.2016 informed that
     the information regarding lease land whose leases have expired, as
     sought by the applicant does not pertain to his office as the branch deals
     with allotment of plot under Rohini Residential Scheme-1981.



2. The matter was subsequently listed before the Commission and
   summarily dismissed by the order dated 25.04.2016 passed by a
   predecessor Bench. Being aggrieved by the dismissal, the Applicant filed
   a Writ petition being WP(C) no. 2652/2017, challenging the order dated
   25.04.2016 passed by the Commission. The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi
   vide its order dated 27.03.2017 disposed of the Writ Petition with the
   following observations:

        ".....Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that on account of
        some personal reasons, he could not appear, when the matter
        was listed. He submits that the petitioner is very much
        interested in prosecuting the complaints filed before the Central
        Information Commission (CIC). He refers to the Notice of hearing
        to contend that it was not obligatory for him to appear.
        In view of the submissions made above, the impugned order
        dated 25.04.2016 is set aside. The complaints filed by the
        petitioner are restored to the file of the Commission....."



3.   Subsequently, the matters were re-listed before the Commission for
     adjudication and parties were duly notified about hearing fixed on
     22.05.2017.

 4.   Both parties were present during the hearing. Upon being asked by the
     Commission, the applicant narrated that his primary focus was to
     reveal information about properties leased out during the pre-
     independence era for 90 years or 99 years for private as well as
     institutional use. It is expected that due to passage of considerable
     period of time, these leases would have expired by now and thus the
     lease/s is/are no longer functional, yet the tenants/lessee continue to
     occupy the premises, which are usually spread over large spaces, for
     measly rental amounts which have barely been revised in all these
     years. Thus the lessees/occupants of the premises are residing in large
     properties virtually free of cost. Lack of knowledge of the number of
     such premises and lack of initiative of Municipal authorities for getting
     such premises vacated are leading to loss worth several crores to the
     Government. The query of the applicant is centred around the core
     issue of larger interest of the society, since public money is drained by
     loss of revenue with respect to these properties. Hence, the Commission
     applauds applicant's quest for information which indeed is for a
     national cause, considering that all Presidency towns have grown multi-
     fold as metropolitan cities and are bursting at the seams under the
     burden of over population. In such a scenario, occupying huge
     government properties at almost free of cost is definitely not in the
     interest of citizens nor of the Government since the properties can earn
     substantial revenue by leasing them at current market value. The
     applicant has requested that since he is seeking information in these
     cases, the Complaints may be converted into appeals.



5.   Respondents on their part have stated that the query raised by the
     appellant in this case is one which has already been deliberated upon
     by the office of the Lieutenant Governor. Under directions of the Hon'ble
     LG and competent authorities, the Respondent is already duty bound to
     draw out the old records and files of such leases (granted during the
     pre-Independence period) from archives, if necessary, in order to put
     together necessary information about all such Old properties, their
     lessees, rental amounts, period of lease and take action with respect to
     properties whose leases have expired by efflux of time.
      The Respondent has added that since the perpetual leases of most of
      such old properties expired only recently, a specific window/Scheme
      was announced for a year, for occupants/lessees of all such Old
      properties to have the said lease/s renewed/extended. Applications
      received from such lessees were duly considered and lease/s extended.
      However, many properties which sums up to approximately 6000-7000
      properties, were still left out from being granted any extension of lease,
      because of lack of any application. A draft policy has been formulated
      for such properties and action shall be initiated once the policy
      decision is finalised in this aspect. Stating their genuine difficulty, the
      Respondents explained that records are in different places, as the
      properties fell within different jurisdictions at the time the lease/s were
      executed and also the terms and laws governing lot of these properties
      were completely different in such historical period of time. Hence,
       collecting information at grass root level, pertaining to these properties
      and their land records/leases etc. will take considerable amount of
      time despite the fact that many a high officials including the office of
      the Hon'ble LG is keen on expeditious action on this issue. A minimum
      period of six months shall be required in coming anywhere close to
      formulating a Scheme/policy regarding these ancient properties and
      their residents.



 6.   The appellant corroborated his averments made in the preceding
      paragraph by his written submissions submitted during the hearing.
      He has placed reliance on two decisions of the Commission, whereby
      similar cases were decided bearing numbers CIC/DS/A/2013/002474-
      YA and CIC/YA/A/2015/000099 and it was held that information
      related to greater public interest and must be disclosed. The appellant
      has further stated that there has been inordinate delay in providing
      even the basic reply by the PIO and accordingly he must be penalised
      for violation of the provisions of the Act.



 7.   The appellant does not dispute the veracity of the reply furnished by
      the Respondent/CPIO-LSB(RO), but the breach of the mandated time
      line is strongly objected by the appellant. During the hearing, the
      Respondent stated that information as sought by the appellant is likely
      to be in the custody of the LAB, Rohini not LSB, Rohini. It was further
      contended by the Appellant that even the hearing notice issued by the
      Commission for today's hearing, was transferred by CPIO(LSB-RO) vide
      letter dated 16.05.2017 to the Dy. Director (Coordination) Lands
 u/S
      6(3)
 to attend the hearing. He stated that this reveals the lack of
      understanding of the 
RTI Act
 by the Respondent. The Respondent
      replied that since the information related to the LAB-RO, the LSB
      branch transferred the hearing notice through the Dy. Director(Co
      ordination) Lands to the concerned official, so that the hearing can be
      attended by the relevant officer.



 8.   The Respondent, CPIO,IL on their part have explained their response
      dated 28.08.2015 stating that the Institutional Land Branch, came
      into existence only after formation of the DDA, post 1957. Hence, the
      perpetual leases granted by this Branch for Institutional use, have not
      yet expired since tenure of the perpetual leases is of 90 to 99 years. It
      has also been averred by the Respondents that with technological
      advancement, methods like satellite mapping of areas and such other
      effective methods are being employed in order to increase efficiency of
      the Land Management Department of NDMC.



Decision:

9.    After hearing parties and perusal of record, the Commission finds that
      the queries of the appellant have been clearly spelt out. He has asked
      for all the leases granted by the Government of India, under various
      categories, prior to the independence and thereafter. He has sought
       specific details with respect to each - whether continuing and decision
      taken with respect to the ones which have expired. The Commission
      commends the appellant for raising the issue since the loss of revenue
      on account of such leases continuing at throwaway prices is bringing
      a huge revenue loss to the exchequer.



10.   Such an information was expected to be already available with the
      DDA considering the fact that planned development of Delhi is one of
      the primary functions of the DDA under 
Sections 7-11A
 of the DD Act
      of 1957. More so, when as informed by PIO, OSB that there are 6000-
      7000 properties which are still under the OSB for deliberations
      whether to continue with such old leases or take appropriate action.
      The DDA also deals with the Master Plan, Zonal Plans etc. And yet its
      strange to find no mention of such leases on the website, the area
      coverage of such leases which would be vital for any future planning.
      Very briefly put, so far, the replies lead to the following information
      trail:

      i.     The properties handled by OSB are leases executed during the
             British era, some of which have expired recently and are under
             consideration of the Public Authority for their continuation or
             necessary further action. There are 6 to 7 thousand such
             properties which have been discussed even at the level of the
             Lieutenant Governor and appropriate directions have been given
             in this regard for segregation, tabulation etc. According to the
             OSB it will take roughly six months to even arrive at the total
             figure of such cases to be dealt with.

      ii.    The properties handled by the IL branch are the Institutional
             Leases which are accorded for 90-99 years. This branch which
             came into existence after 1957 has accorded leases, none of
             which has expired. However, they again despite having executed
             such leases do not have the record in a compiled form to give
             information about the numbers, lessees, purpose for which they
             were given and the area coverage.

      iii.   The third category is not clear. However, the position so
             emerged from the hearing that information pertaining all other
             categories of leasehold properties is available with the LAB-RO,
             but the RTI application reached the LSB-RO.



11.   With respect to the first query, it is noted that the Respondents have
      contended that such old records are being reconstructed for drawing
      out an effective action plan for the old buildings and properties leased
      out almost a century back. It has been averred by the Respondent
      that since records are in different places, as the properties fell within
        different jurisdictions at the time the lease/s were executed, different
       laws governed the various parcels of land it is a herculean task and
       hence undeniably time consuming. It is also noted that it is
       impossible to answer the queries because of non availability of any
       compiled information, as it transpires from the above deliberations
       and also it is not possible to hold any one PIO as custodian of the
       information. The PIO's averments during the hearing have sought to
       explain the cause of delay in furnishing the information. The
       Commission finds that given the circumstances there was no compiled
       information to furnish and also the information sought was huge and
       could not have been given in the given period of time. The Commission
       however feels that this aspect should have been brought to the notice
       of the appellant at the first instance itself. The same argument runs
       through with respect to the Institutional leases also.



Conclusion


 12.   While the appellant has raised a genuine query, one which relates to
       public interest at large, the Commission also notes that the diverse
       custodians of information, rather the different designations held by
       the same public official, in this case makes it a virtually impossible
       exercise to seek the exact information from the exact custodian. The
       information seeker cannot be expected to go through this labyrinth of
       official designations to seek information. Hence the Commission is of
       the opinion that balancing the difficulty expressed by the Respondent
       with the query of the appellant, it is advisable that as a nodal point,
       the Senior Research Officer, RTI Cell- Co ordination Branch in
       coordination with the Deputy Director, OSB are given the
       responsibility to gather information from various custodians under
       
Section 5(4)
 of the RTI Act, collate and then disseminate to the
       appellant under intimation to the Commission within three weeks of
       the receipt of this order. The Reply should clearly state the following:

       I.OSB- the current status of compilation of records with respect to the
       leases, their lessees, tenure, decision taken after expiry of such leases
       and the time expected for compilation of tabulation of complete data.
       Necessary documents with respect to the LG's meeting on this subject
       and directions of the LG in this regard shall also be furnished to the
       appellant.

       II.IL - Same as above.

       III.LAB-RO- The LAB-RO holding information in the above lines is also
           directed to provide complete information about the current status
           of compilation of records with respect to the leases, their lessees,
           tenure, decision taken after expiry of such leases and the time
          expected for compilation of tabulation of complete data. Since the
         PIO, LSB received the RTI application, the Commission directs the
         PIO, LSB to forthwith transfer the RTI application to the relevant
         custodian of information and ensure that accurate and complete
         response from the PIO, LAB is sent to the appellant within three
         weeks of receipt of this order, with a copy mandatorily marked to
         the Commission.



    The main grievance of the appellant qua the LSB-RO was the delay in
    furnishing of reply by the CPIO, since as per statement of the PIO, LSB-
    RO, the actual custodian of information is LAB-RO. But it has not been
    explained by the PIO, LSB, Rohini anywhere as to what prevented him
    from transferring the RTI application to the PIO, LAB. The Registry of
    this Bench is directed to issue a Show Cause Notice upon the PIO, LSB,
    Rohini to explain why no penalty should be imposed on him for not
    transferring the RTI application to the appropriate custodian of
    information thereby causing deliberate obstruction to the flow of
    information. The PIO, LSB shall file this explanation/reply within two
    weeks of receipt of this order. Hearing of the Show Cause case to be
    scheduled in normal course.



In view of the aforesaid discussions on this matter, it is evident that no
information with respect to the old leases of Government properties is
available in a compiled form with the Respondent for the reasons cited above
by the Respondent. However, it transpired during the course of hearing that
officials including the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi has indicated his
keenness on the subject and directed the DDA and other Land management
and Civic Bodies to devise a mechanism of identifying, segregating,
tabulating and compiling information about such ancient leases. In the
considered opinion of the Commission, the information as sought by the
appellant should have been available in a compiled form with the
Respondent/DDA, as noted above, and proactively disclosed by the public
authority under 
Section 4(1)(b)
 of the RTI Act. Keeping in view that the
citizens of the country should have access to information about leased out
public properties and drainage of public revenue with respect to the same,
the Commission, in exercise of powers conferred under 
Section 19(8)
 of the
RTI Act, deems it appropriate to issue guidelines in this regard. Information
regarding all such properties which had been historically leased by the
Government of India, name/s of the lessees, type of lease - private or
Institutional, tenure of such lease/s, number of expired lease/s, action
taken with respect to expired leases/s etc. shall be compiled as directed
above and published on the website of the Respondent/DDA.



The Respondent expressed that approximately six months will be required in
compiling data about such historical Government lease/s, hence the
Commission directs the Respondents to submit an Action Taken/Progress
  Report by or within August 2017 and a Compilation of data at the end of six
 months i.e. November 2017.



The appeals are thus allowed on the above terms.



                                                        (Yashovardhan Azad)
                                                  Information Commissioner

 Authenticated true copy. Additional copies of orders shall be supplied
 against application and payment of the charges prescribed under the Act to
 the CPIO of this Commission.



                                                                  (R.P.Grover)
                                                            Designated Officer
 Copy to:-



Senior Research Officer - RTI Cell     Public Information Officer under RTI
Delhi Development Authority,           Shri N. K. Sharma - Dy.
RTI Implementation &                   Dir.-(OSB), Delhi Development
Co-ordination Branch, C-Block,         Authority, Old Scheme Branch,
3rd Floor, VikasSadan,                 A-Block, 2nd Floor, VikasSadan, I.N.A.
I.N.A. Market, NewDelhi-110023.        Market, NewDelhi-110023.
DEEPAK JUNEJA                          Public Information Officer under RTI
                                       DeputyDirector-Coordination-

                                       (Lands),Delhi Development
                                       Authority,Lands Department, A-

                                       Block,Ground Floor, VikasSadan,
                                       I.N.A. Market, NewDelhi-110023.

First Appellate Authority under RTI    Public Information Officer under RTI
Shri SanjeevMittal-Director-(Lands),   Deputy Land & Development
DelhiDevelopment Authority, Lands      Officer, Land & Development
Department, A-Block, 2ndFloor,         Office (Ministry of Urban
VikasSadan, I.N.A.Market,              Development), Nirman Bhawan,
New Delhi-110023.                      New Delhi-110001.

Nodal Officer - RTI Cell,              Nodal Officer - RTI Cell,
Office of the Director,                Office of the Director,
Directorate of Local Bodies            Directorate of Local Bodies
(Government of NCT of Delhi),          (Government of NCT of Delhi),
9th Level, C-Wing, Delhi               9th Level, C-Wing, Delhi
Secretariat, I.P. Estate, NewDelhi-    Secretariat, I.P. Estate, NewDelhi-
110002.                                110002.
Deputy Director-Land Sale Branch-      Deputy Director-Inst. Lands,
Rohini,Delhi DevelopmentAuthority      Delhi DevelopmentAuthority
Land SalesBranch-Rohini,               Institutional LandsBranch, VikasSadan,

VikasSadan,INA Market, New Delhi-23.   INAMarket, New Delhi-23.
 ADJUNCT ORDER:



Date of Hearing: 22.07.2020

Note: Aggrieved due to non-compliance of the order of the Commission by the Public
Authority the Complainant approached the Commission vide letter dated 19.09.2017.



HEARING:

Facts emerging during the hearing:

The following were present:

Appellant: Mr. Deepak Juneja in person;

Respondent: Mr. Paras Nath, Dy. Dir. LAB (Rohini & LSB), Mr. Lalit Mohan,
AD (LAB) (RO), Mr. Indresh Kumar, Dy. Dir. (OSB) and Mr. Rakesh Kumar, AD/ OSB
and Mr. Sanjeev Sagar, Standing Counsel and Mr. Sada Shiv, Dy. Dir. (IL) in person;



The Complainant referred to the order of the Commission dated 22.05.2017 and stated
that the direction contained therein to submit an Action Taken/Progress Report by or
within August 2017 and to disclosure the minutes with respect to the LG's meeting on
this subject and directions of the LG in this regard were not complied, till date. Thus, the
Complainant referred to his non-compliance application and prayed that penal action be
initiated against the erring official and compensation be provided to him. In its reply, the
Respondent stated that the decision of the Commission dated 22.05.2017 was challenged
before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in WP (C) 7786/2017 wherein vide order dated
05.09.2017, the Court held as under:



       "In view of the above, this Court is not inclined to interfere with the directions
       issued by the CIC to DDA to compile the said data. The question whether the same
       ought to be disclosed in the manner as directed by the CIC, would be examined at
       a subsequent stage. Accordingly, DDA is directed to complete this exercise within
       a period of nine months from today. Further issues raised in this petition would be
       considered, thereafter."



The counsel for the Respondent referred to their detailed affidavit dated 22.07.2020
submitted to the Commission and the Complainant during the hearing and stated that the
direction of the Hon'ble High Court had been complied with by the OSB Branch of DDA
and the said data would be disclosed as per the directions of the High Court in the said
matter. During the hearing, the Respondent also intimated that the matter was expected to
be tentatively listed before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi on 27.07.2020 and that the
directions of the Court would be suitably complied with. The Complainant vehemently
contested the submissions of the Respondent. On being queried, if he had raised this
issue during the proceedings before the Hon'ble High Court, the Complainant replied in
the negative.

 DECISION:



Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by both the parties and
considering the fact that the earlier decision pronounced by the Commission dated
22.05.2017 was presently under adjudication with the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in WP
(C) 7786/2017, no further intervention of the Commission is warranted at this stage.



                                                        Bimal Julka (िबमल जु का)
                                 Chief Information Commissioner (मु य सूचना आयु )


Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत        त)




K.L. Das (के .एल.दास)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26186535/ 
[email protected]

 दनांक / Date: 24.07.2020