[Cites 
8
, Cited by 
2
]




Central Information Commission


Om Prakash Kashiram vs Central Board Of Indirect Taxes And ... on 15 December, 2022


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/CBECE/A/2020/140869

Om Prakash Kashiram                                  ......अपीलकता /Appellant

                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम
CPIO,
   1. O/o the Principal Chief
      Controller of Accounts,
      Ministry of Finance,
      Central Board of Indirect
      Tax & Customs, RTI Cell,
      AGCR Building, I.P. Estate,
      New Delhi-110003

   2. Department of Economic
      Affairs, RTI Cell, 224-B,
      North Block,
      New Delhi-110001                         .... ितवादीगण /Respondent(s)

Date of Hearing                     :   13/12/2022
Date of Decision                    :   13/12/2022

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :              Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on            :   29/08/2020
CPIO replied on                     :   11/09/2020
First appeal filed on               :   25/09/2020
First Appellate Authority order     :   Not on record
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated          :   26/11/2020

Information sought
:



                                           1


 The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 29.08.2020 seeking the following
information:

      1. "Please provide the relevant documents duly attested by the Public
      information Officer appointed under Section 2(h) in hierarchy position of the
      Principal Chief Controller and Accounts, New Delhi under Section 5(1) and
      
Section 20
 of RTI Act 2005 regarding all state wise distribution amount of
      CGST collection for the financial year 2017-18 of Rs.2.03.260.29 crores with
      name of state and amount distributed to each state/UT wise. In this
      connection letter No. Comp/Rev/4.1/6/RTI(22) /2019-20/881 dated
      21.10.2019 is enclosed is enclosed herewith.

      2. Please provide the relevant documents duly attested by the Public
      information Officer appointed under 
Section 2(h)
 in hierarchy position of the
      Principal Chief Controller and Accounts, New Delhi under 
Section 5(1)
 and
      
Section 20
 of RTI Act 2005 regarding all state wise distribution amount of
      CGST collection for the financial year 2018-19 of Rs.4.57.534.01 crores with
      name of state and amount distributed to each state/UT wise. In this
      connection letter No. Comp/Rev/4.1/6/RTI(22) /2019-20/881 dated
      21.10.2019 is enclosed herewith.

      3. Please provide the relevant documents duly attested by the Public
      information Officer appointed under 
Section 2(h)
 in hierarchy position of the
      Principal Chief Controller and Accounts, New Delhi under 
Section 5(1)
 and
      
Section 20
 of RTI Act 2005 regarding all state wise distribution amount of
      CGST collection for the financial year 2019-20 (upto September 2019) of
      Rs.2.47.576.85 crores with name of state and amount distributed to each
      state/UT wise. In this connection letter No. Comp/Rev/4.1/6/RTI(22) /2019-
      20/881 dated 21.10.2019 is enclosed herewith.

      4. All tractions for transfer of amounts of CGST to all State Governments
      and Union Territory of India for Point No.1 to 3 above duly attested by PIO
      with name and designation appointed under 
Section 2(h)
 of RTI Act 2005
      and 
Section 20
 of RTI Act 2005 and 
Section 5(1)
 of RTI Act 2005."



The CPIO replied to the appellant on 11.09.2020 as under:-



      Para No. 1 to 4:-" It is stated that this department only concerns with CGST
      receipt. The distribution to State and UTs is dealt by Ministry of Finance.
      Hence, your application (in original) is being transferred under 
section 6(3)

      of the RTI Act, 2005 to SO & CPIO, Ministry of Finance, Department of
      Economic Affairs, 224-B, North Block, New Delhi."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 25.09.2020. FAA's
order, if any, is not available on record.



                                         2


 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-

Appellant: Not present.

Respondent(s): Anjli Tyagi, Sr. Accounts Officer (Accounts) & CPIO, CBIC along
with Rakesh Bhatnagar, Deputy Director & CPIO, DoEA present through intra-
video conference.



Decision:



At the outset, the Commission recalls the adverse remarks recorded against the
appalling misuse of the 
RTI Act
 being continued by the Appellant time and again.
While this bench of the Commission has alone heard more than 20 cases, the
instant case is being heard as a part of 19 other cases of the same Appellant filed
against different public authorities, and the records of the Commission suggest
that till date more than 400 odd cases of him have been disposed of by different
benches. This bench had recorded in one such case heard vide File No.
CIC/DOP&T/A/2020/126122 as under:



       "The Commission based on a perusal of the facts on record observes that
the instant case is squarely covered by the decision of this bench dated 10.02.2021
in an earlier set of appeals filed by the same Appellant (CIC/DOP&T/A/2019/114497
+ 10 other Appeals) wherein the following adverse observations were recorded:



      'This bench of the Commission heard 11 other Appeals of the Appellant
      simultaneously and upon a conjoint consideration of these cases it is
      apparent beyond reasonable doubt that the Appellant is unabashedly filing
      multiple RTI Applications, which in most cases is repetitive in nature as the
      same RTI Application is filed with different public authorities. Moreover, the
      queries of the Appellant neither conform to 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act nor
      can these be comprehended easily. The Appellant seeks all sundry
      information under the garb of transparency and in the process of dealing
      with these RTI Applications, at some point in time, invariably; each public
      authority is dealing with the same RTI Application more than once. The
      Commission is also irked to note that in all of these Appeals, the Appellant
      has stated in his Second Appeal that he does not want to avail of the
      opportunity to plead his case in person or through his representative also.
      This further establishes the fact that the Appellant is merely a habitual RTI


                                         3

       Applicant with no intention of gaining access to information. The RTI
      Applications, First Appeal(s) and Second Appeals of the Appellant without
      any substance or merit has a cascading effect on the functioning of the
      public authorities and throttles the letter and spirit of the 
RTI Act
 in addition
      to causing a huge loss of public money on stationery and allied resources. It
      appears that the Appellant has grossly misconceived the idea of exercising
      his Right to Information as being absolute and unconditional. The Appellant
      shall note that even the superior Courts have recognized the misuse of the
      
RTI Act
 as an impediment to ensuring transparency and probity in the
      functioning of the government through various judgments such as the
      Hon'ble Supreme Court's observation......'

      xxx"



The instant case appears to be a mere extension of the averred appeals in terms
of the manner in which the information is sought for and the grounds on which
the Appeal(s) are premised on. Further, as observed in the earlier cases, the
Appellant has indicated in the grounds of the instant Appeal that he does not
want to avail of the opportunity to plead his case. In addition to this, the
Appellant has also returned the notice of hearing of the Commission as "Refused";
he fails to place proper facts on record in terms of the copy of replies received by
him or he simply decides for himself that he is not required to accept certain
replies that he deems to be improper or returns the replies to the CPIO(s) citing
expiry of mandated time period. The Appellant is strongly rebuked for making a
mockery of the 
RTI Act
 in as much as the contents of all of his RTI Applications and
grounds of Appeal(s) are outright ludicrous and completely bereft of merit. The
time and resources of the Commission invested in disposing off the cases of the
Appellant as well as the time and resources invested by the public authorities in
responding to the Commission's notice(s) as well as attending to the hearings
clearly appears to be an avoidable cost to the public exchequer, and the Appellant
ought to have due regard to this fact in the spirit of the 
RTI Act
.



The Appellant not seeking for any information as per 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act
yet being hysterical in his Second Appeal(s) reminds this bench about the
following observations made by the Apex Court in the above discussed judgment
of 
CBSE vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors.
 against impractical demands for
information under the 
RTI Act
:




       "....Indiscriminate and impractical demands or directions under 
RTI Act
 for
disclosure of all and sundry information (unrelated to transparency and
accountability in the functioning of public authorities and eradication of


                                          4

 corruption) would be counter-productive as it will adversely affect the efficiency
of the administration and result in the executive getting bogged down with the
non- productive work of collecting and furnishing information. 
The Act
 should
not be allowed to be misused or abused, to become a tool to obstruct the
national development and integration, or to destroy the peace, tranquility and
harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be converted into a tool of oppression
or intimidation of honest officials striving to do their duty. The nation does not
want a scenario where 75% of the staff        of public authorities spends 75% of
their time in collecting and furnishing information to applicants instead of
discharging their regular duties. The threat of penalties under the 
RTI Act
 and
the pressure of the authorities under the 
RTI Act
 should not lead to employees of
a public authorities prioritising 'information furnishing', at the cost of their
normal and regular duties."



Similarly, in ICAI v. Shaunak H. Satya, (2011) 8 SCC781 the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has held that:-



      '39. We however agree that it is necessary to make a distinction in regard to
information intended to bring transparency, to improve accountability and to
reduce corruption, falling under 
Sections 4(1)(b)
 and (c) and other information
which may not have a bearing on accountability or reducing corruption. The
competent authorities under the 
RTI Act
 will have to maintain a proper balance so
that while achieving transparency, the demand for information does not reach
unmanageable proportions affecting other public interests, which include efficient
operation of public authorities and the Government, preservation of
confidentiality of sensitive information and optimum use of limited fiscal
resources.'

In the matter of Rajni Maindiratta- Vs Directorate of Education (North West - B)
[W.P.(C) No. 7911/2015] the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi has held that:



      '8. Though undoubtedly, the reason for seeking the information is not
required to be disclosed but when it is found that the process of the law is being
abused, the same become relevant. Neither the authorities created under the 
RTI
Act
 nor the Courts are helpless if witness the provisions of law being abused and
owe a duty to immediately put a stop thereto.'

And, in the matter of Shail Sahni vs Sanjeev Kumar [W.P.(C) 845/2014] the
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi has held that:



      '...xxx


                                         5

        'This Court is also of the view that misuse of the 
RTI Act
 has to be
appropriately dealt with, otherwise the public would lose faith and confidence in
this "sunshine Act". A beneficent Statute, when made a tool for mischief and
abuse must be checked in accordance with law.'

Similarly, the Preamble of the RTI Act also acknowledges 'efficient operations of
the Governments', 'optimum use of limited fiscal resources' as a valid
consideration while exercising ones right to information.



Having observed as above, the Commission is not inclined to adjudge the
action/alleged inaction of the Respondent in the instant matter and summarily
rejects the Appeal.



                          The appeal is dismissed accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                         6