[Cites 
7
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Sahdula / Santosha Devi vs Life Insurance Corporation Of India on 18 January, 2021


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                              के ीय सूचना आयोग
                     Central Information Commission
                          बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                      Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                      नई िद ी, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं     ा / Second Appeal No. CIC/LICOI/A/2019/121339

Sahdula Santosha Devi                                      ... अपीलकता/Appellant
                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम
CPIO                                                       ... ितवादी /Respondent
Life Insurance Corporation of India
Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:

 RTI : 23-10-2018             FA    : 28-12-2018           SA       : 08-05-2019

 CPIO : 29-11-2018            FAO : 30-01-2019             Hearing : 08-01-2021

                                    ORDER

1.     The appellant filed an application under the 
Right to Information Act, 2005


(RTI Act
) before the Central Public Information Officer (CPIO), Life Insurance
Corporation of India, Allahabad seeking following information regarding insurance
policy of her deceased husband:-

   1. "Why has no payment been made to the nominee against the insurance
       claim till date?

   2. What is the rate of interest for delayed payment?"

2.     The CPIO responded on 29-11-2018. The appellant filed the first appeal dated
28-12-2018 which was disposed of by the first appellate authority on 30-01-2019.
Thereafter, she filed a second appeal u/
Section 19(3)
 of the RTI Act before the
Commission requesting to take appropriate legal action against the CPIO u/
Section
20
 of the RTI Act, 2005 and also to direct him to provide the sought for information.
Hearing:

3.     The appellant, Smt. Sahdula Santosha Devi attended the hearing along with
her counsel Mr. Omprakash Giri, Advocate through audio conferencing. Mr. G C


                                                                           Page 1 of 4

 Upadhyay, CPIO participated in the hearing representing the respondent through
audio conferencing. The written submissions are taken on record.

4.     The Ld. Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted that the
respondent should be directed to clarify as to when the insurance claim would be
settled & what would be the rate of interest for the delayed payment.

5.     The respondent submitted that the queries raised by the appellant are
presumptive in nature which are not covered u/
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.

Nonetheless, they have provided a factual reply to the appellant vide their letter dated
30-01-2019 thereby indicating that 8.25% interest is payable for the delayed
payment. The given reply was also read out by the respondent.
Decision:

6.     This Commission observes that the appellant herein attempts to elicit answers
to her situational queries regarding tentative date of settlement of the insurance claim
including the rate of interest thereof. Therefore, the CPIO is not supposed to interpret
information; or to furnish replies to situational queries; or to furnish clarifications.

Hence, the queries seeking answers and explanations from the CPIO are not covered
within the definition of 'information' u/
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. In this
regard, the Commission refers to the definition of 'information' u/s 
Section 2(f)
 of
the RTI Act, 2005 which is reproduced below:-

              "information" means any material in any form, including
              records, documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press
              releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, report, papers,
              samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and
              information relating to any private body which can be accessed
              by a public authority under any other law for the time being in
              force."

Furthermore, a reference can also be made to the relevant extract of 
Section 2 (j)
 of
the RTI Act, 2005 which reads as under:-

             "(j) right to information" means the right to information
             accessible under this Act which is held by or under the control of
             any public authority and includes ........"

In this context, a reference is also made to the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in

CBSE and Anr. v. Aditya Bandopadhyay and Ors
, 2011 (8) SCC 497,wherein it
was held as under:-


             35..... "It is also not required to provide 'advice' or 'opinion' to
             an applicant, nor required to obtain and furnish any 'opinion' or
             'advice' to an applicant. The reference to 'opinion' or 'advice'
             in the definition of 'information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only

                                                                              Page 2 of 4

              refers to such material available in the records of the public
             authority. Many public authorities have, as a public relation
             exercise, provide advice, guidance and opinion to the citizens.

             But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused with any
             obligation under the 
RTI Act
."

Similarly, the High Court of Bombay in 
Dr. Celsa Pinto, Ex-Officio Joint
Secretary (School Education) v. The Goa State Information Commission
 on 3
April, 2008 (2008 (110) Bom L R 1238) had held as under:-


             "
Section 2(f)
 -Information means any material in any form,
             including records, documents, memos e-mails, opinions,
             advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts,
             reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
             electronic form and information relating to any private body
             which can be accessed by a public authority under any other law
             for the time being in force; The definition cannot include within
             its fold answers to the question why which would be the same
             thing as asking the reason for a justification for a particular
             thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot expect to
             communicate to the citizen the reason why a certain thing was
             done or not done in the sense of a justification because the
             citizen makes a requisition about information. Justifications are
             matter within the domain of adjudicating authorities and cannot
             properly be classified as information."

             The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the
             question why which would be the same thing as asking the
             reason for a justification for a particular thing. The Public
             Information Authorities cannot expect to communicate to the
             citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not done in
             the sense of a justification because the citizen makes a
             requisition about information. Justifications are matter within
             the domain of adjudicating authorities and cannot properly be
             classified as information."

7.     In light of the factual matrix of the instant appeal and the aforesaid case-laws,
this Commission is of the considered opinion that the CPIO is not obliged to provide
any clarification to the queries raised which are interrogatory in nature. Nonetheless,
the CPIO has judiciously disposed of the RTI application by supplying a factual
reply to the appellant vide letter dated 30-01-2019 thereby indicating that 8.25%
interest is payable for the delayed payment. Hence, no further intervention of the
Commission is required in the matter.

8.     With the above observations, the appeal is disposed of.

                                                                              Page 3 of 4


 9.    Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.


                                                                नीरज कु मार गु ा)
                                          Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरज             ा
                                        Information Commissioner (सूसूचना आयु )
                                                        दनांक / Date 08-01-2021
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#ािपत ित)

S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),
(011-26105682)


Addresses of the parties:

1.    CPIO
      Life Insurance Corporation of India
      RTI Cell, CRM/PS Deptt., Jeevan Prakash
      172A/40, MG Marg, Civil Lines
      Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh

2.    Sahdula Santosha Devi





                                                                        Page 4 of 4