[Cites 
21
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Arun Kumar Goel vs Consulate General Of India, Sydney, ... on 21 June, 2022


Author: 
Heeralal Samariya


Bench: 
Heeralal Samariya


                                    केन्द्रीय सच
                                               ू ना आयोग
                      Central Information Commission
                          बाबा गंगनाथ मागग ,मुननरका
                       Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                       नई निल्ली, New Delhi - 110067

 नितीय अपील संख्या/Second Appeal No.: CIC/CGSAU/A/2020/120098

 Arun Kumar Goel                                           .....अपीलकताग /Appellant

                                     VERSUS/बनाम

    1. Public Information Officer Under RTI,
       Consulate General of India-(Sydney),
       Through: Under Secretary-(RTI Section),
       Ministry of External Affairs, Room No.-2021,
       A-Wing, Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan, 23-D,
       Janpath, New Delhi-110011.
                                                             ...प्रनतवािीगण/Respondents

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

  RTI application filed on           :   30.01.2020
  CPIO replied on                    :   25.02.2020
  First appeal filed on              :   08.03.2020
  First Appellate Authority order    :   31.03.2020
  Second Appeal received at CIC      :   24.07.2020
  Date of interim Decision           :   04.05.2022
  Date of final Hearing                  26.05.2022
  Date of final Decision                 20.06.2022



                   सूचना आयुक्त   : श्री हीरालाल सामररया
            Information Commissioner:    Shri Heeralal Samariya

  Information sought
:

  The Appellant sought information:



   • PIO furnished reply, vide letter dated 28.03.2019, as under:



                                                                            Page 1 of 24


 • Dissatisfied with the response received from PIO, Appellant filed First
  Appeal, vide letter dated 12.04.2020. The FAA vide order dated
  14.06.2020 upheld the reply of the PIO.



• Written submissions have been received from PIO, vide letter dated
  18.03.2022, as under:



                                                               Page 2 of 24


 Page 3 of 24


 Grounds for Second Appeal:

The PIO has not provided correct information to the Appellant.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing on 04.05.2022

The following were present: -



Appellant: present in person

Respondent: Mr. Subhash Agrawal, Rep. of CPIO, present in person.



The Appellant stated that he is not satisfied with the reply of the CPIO. He
further stated that an information was denied to him on the baseless ground. He
furthermore submitted that the copy of the documents sought under the RTI are
the "lease agreements", which were purportedly claimed to be signed by the
appellant herein, when he was working as the Consul General of India, at Sydney
during the years 2O12 to 2014. At that time the consulate was working at the
leased premises. Above all in the year 2O15, the Consulate General of India has
shifted at the GOI owned premises, therefore the excuse of not providing the
information under section 8 (a) and (d) of the 
RTI Act
 2005 is not sustainable. He
in addition to above referred the judgement of the Commission in case no.
CIC/LADOF/A/2018/115445-BJ dated 12.09.2019, wherein copy of the lease
agreements as sought in the instant RTI Application was directed to be disclosed.



The Rep. of the CPIO submitted that he would like to submit his detailed written
submission countering the submissions of the Appellant and therefore, requested
the Commission to adjourn the matter for a short date.



Interim Decision dated 04.05.2022

Commission on the basis of proceedings during hearing concedes with the
request of the Rep. of the CPIO and provide him an opportunity to file a
submission in counter to the arguments raised by the appellant during the course
of hearing. The written submission of CPIO as directed above shall reach the
Commission on or before 16.05.2022 with a copy duly endorsed to the Appellant
via email. Further, if the Appellant desires to counter the submission of CPIO, he
may submit the same to the Commission within 7 days of receipt of the CPIO's
submission.



The final proceedings shall reconvene on 26.05.2022 at 12:45 pm.


      The matter is adjourned till next date of hearing (i.e. 26.05.2022).



                                                                        Page 4 of 24


                              Final Decision

Note: The Commission based on the request of the respondents adjourned
the hearing and provided them an opportunity to file their written
arguments with the copy marked to the Appellant and thereafter, Appellant
was given liberty to file his counter arguments, if any in the matter. The
written submissions of both the parties have now been received and same is
perused and taken on record.



  • The written submission of the PIO dated 10.05.2022:



                                                                 Page 5 of 24


 Page 6 of 24


 Page 7 of 24


 Page 8 of 24


 Page 9 of 24


 Page 10 of 24


 • The written submission of the Appellant dated 'Nil':



                                                         Page 11 of 24


 Page 12 of 24


 Page 13 of 24


 Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing on 26.05.2022:



The following were present: -



Appellant: present in person

Respondent: Mr. Subhash Agrawal, Rep. of CPIO, present in person.



                                                                    Page 14 of 24


    Upon Commissions instance, the rep of PIO submitted that a written submission
   enumerating all the details has already been submitted for the perusal of the
   Commission on 10.05.2022.



   The Appellant stated that the arguments raised by the PIO in the averred written
   submission to substantiate their denial of the information under the garb of
   
section 8(1)(a)
 & (d), are misleading, vague and incorrect. He further stated a
   detailed counter arguments have already been filed in lieu of the written
   submissions filed by the Respondents. He strongly argued that the Respondent
   authority has already furnished the copy of the similar lease deeds for different
   time in response of his some other RTI Application, however, in response to the
   instant RTI Application they are raising illegal grounds to deny the disclosure of
   the same. He furthermore stated that his sole purpose for seeking the relevant
   lease deeds is to check its credibility and therefore, PIO can invoke severability
   clause and redact the exempted information and provide him the rest of it. He
   concluded by stating that he desires the copy of the commercial lease deed for the
   period between 2013-2016 as sought in the instant RTI Application and requested
   the Commission to disclose the same. He in the end concluded by stating that
   relevant lease deed sought would help him defend against the disciplinary
   proceedings initiated against him by the respondent authority.



   The Rep. of the PIO submitted that there is a litigation pending in Hon'ble High
   Court of Delhi as well as Central Administrative Tribunal and the averred lease
   deeds forms the subject matter of the said litigation and Appellant withheld this
   crucial information from the Commission. He further brough the attention of the
   Commission on para 7 & 11 of his Written submission and submitted that
   whatever relevant information could be disclosed has already been provided to
   the Appellant.



   Final Decision:



1. Commission has gone through the case records and on the basis of proceedings
   during hearing observes that the Appellant desires Copies of the "lease
   agreements", signed by him as the Consulate General of India, Sydney, Australia
   between the period of 2012-2016 under the 
RTI Act
 and same was denied by the
   PIO under 
section 8(1)(a)
 & (d) of the 
RTI Act, 2005
.



2. Now, it is the contention of the Appellant that the copy of the lease agreements
   are not secret documents and PIO has incorrectly denied the same. In order to
   corroborate his submission, he placed on record decision of the Commission laid
   down in order no. CIC/LADOF/A/2018/115445-BJ dated 12.09.2019.

                                                                          Page 15 of 24


 Commission perused the said order and relevant portion of the same is produced
herein below:



 
"The Commission referred to the recent decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
      the matter of 
Ferani Hotels Private Limited vs. the State Information Commissioner,
      Greater Mumbai & Others
 in Civil Appeal Nos. 9064-9065 of 2018 (Arising out of
      SLP (C) Nos. 32073-32074/ 2015) dated 27.09.2018, wherein the Hon'ble Court has
      directed to disclose the building plans, sanctioned plans, and details of commercial
      establishments in the public domain. The relevant observations made in the decision
      are mentioned hereunder:




           "34. In the end, we would like to say that keeping in mind the provisions of
                 RERA and their objective, the developer should mandatorily display at
                 the site the sanction plan. The provision of sub-section (3) of 
Section 11

                 of the RERA requires the sanction plan/layout plans along with
                 specifications, approved by the competent authority, to be displayed at
                 the site or such other places, as may be specified by the Regulations
                 made by the Authority. In our view, keeping in mind the ground reality
                 of rampant violations and the consequences thereof, it is advisable to
                 issue directions for display of such sanction plan/layout plans at the site,
                 apart from any other manner provided by the Regulations made by the
                 Authority. This aspect should be given appropriate publicity as part of
                 enforcement of RERA."



 
The Commission also draws reference to the judgment of the Division bench of
      Jharkhand High Court, in 
State of Jharkhand v. Navin Kumar SInhga and Anr.
, AIR
      2008 Jharkhand 19 dated 08/08/2007, wherein it was held as under:




             "26........The question therefore that falls for consideration is as to whether
                 disclosure of various documents submitted by the bidders is a trade
                 secret or commercial confidence or intellectual property. Prima facie, we
                 are of the view that once a decision is taken in the matter of grant of
                 tender, there is no justification to keep it secret. People have a right to
                 know the basis on which the decision has been taken. If tenders are
                 invited by the public authority and on the basis of tender documents, the
                 eligibility of a tenderor or a bidder is decided, then those tender
                 documents cannot be secret, that too, after the tender is decided and
                 work order is issued on the ground that it will amount to disclosure of
                 trade secret or commercial confidence. If the authorities of Government
                 refuse to disclose the document, the very purpose of the Act will be
                 frustrated. Moreover, disclosure of information, sought for by the
                 petitioner, cannot and shall not be a trade secret or commercial
                 confidence; rather disclosure of such information shall be in public
                 interest, inasmuch as it will show the transparency in the activities of the
                 Government.

              27. ......... Since the tender process is completed and contract has been
                 awarded, it will not influence the contract. Besides the above, a citizen
                 has a right to know the genuineness of a document submitted by the
                 tenderer in the matter of grant of tender for consultancy work or for any
                 other work. As noticed above, the tender process is completed and the
                 contract has been awarded, therefore, it will not influence the contract.

                                                                                Page 16 of 24


            In any view of the matter, the document in question cannot be treated as
           trade secret or commercial confidence. In our considered opinion a
           contract entered into by the public authority with a private person cannot
           be treated as confidential after completion of contract."



The Commission also places reliance on the decision of the Hon'ble High Court of
Madras in 
V.V. Mineral v. Director of Geology and Mining, Writ Petition (MD)
No.5427/2007
 dated 25/06/2007 wherein the following was held:




       "11.Therefore, the principal contention that a right accrues to the petitioner
           to object may be correct in the context if a document is exclusively
           submitted by any person to the Government authorities such as property
           statements, income tax returns etc., but in a case of lease deeds and
           transport permits which emanate from the statutory authorities and
           where the petitioner cannot be said to be in exclusive possession, he
           cannot have a right to object to its being divulged as a third party. The
           lease deeds pertaining to minerals as well as transport permits are not
           documents prepared or to be kept by a prospecting mine operator but
           prospecting a mine or mineral is a privilege conferred by the State to the
           individuals, who accepts the norms prescribed under Mines and Minerals
           Act 1957 and the rules framed thereunder.

       12. In the present case, when the third respondent as an Information Officer,
           ordering notice to the petitioner and taking their objection and refusing
           to furnish the documents sought for by a citizen is clearly beyond the
           scope of the 
RTI Act
. If the information is available with the State and
           such information is in exclusive custody of the State, the question of
           seeking any opinion from the third party on such issues may not arise
           especially, when they are public documents. By disclosure of such
           information, no privilege or business interests of the petitioner are
           affected. On the other hand, such a disclosure may help any party to act
           upon those documents and take appropriate steps."



Furthermore, the Commission observed that a voluntary disclosure of all
information such as lists of allotments, terms & conditions of the lease, complete
procedure relating to grant of lease starting from the submission of application till
allotment of properties, details of monitoring authority etc that ought to be
displayed in the public domain should be the rule and members of public who
having to seek information should be an exception. An open government, which is
the cherished objective of the 
RTI Act
, can be realised only if all public offices
comply with proactive disclosure norms. 
Section 4(2)
 of the RTI Act mandates
every public authority to provide as much information suo- motu to the public at
regular intervals through various means of communications, including the Internet,
so that the public need not resort to the use of 
RTI Act
. Thus, information relating to
allotment of alternative plots should be disclosed suo motu in the public domain for
the ease and convenience of the public at large.



The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of 
CBSE and Anr. Vs. Aditya
Bandopadhyay and Ors
 2011 (8) SCC 497 held as under:




       "37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and right to
           information are intended to be formidable tools in the hands of
           responsible citizens to fight corruption and to bring in transparency and

                                                                          Page 17 of 24

           accountability. The provisions of 
RTI Act
 should be enforced strictly
          and all efforts should be made to bring to light the necessary information
          under Clause (b) of 
Section 4(1)
 of the Act which relates to securing
          transparency and accountability in the working of public authorities and
          in discouraging corruption."



The Commission also observes the Hon'ble Delhi High Court ruling in WP (C)
12714/2009 
Delhi Development Authority v. Central Information Commission and
Another
 (delivered on: 21.05.2010), wherein it was held as under:




      "16.It also provides that the information should be easily accessible and to
          the extent possible should be in electronic format with the Central Public
          Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as the case
          may be. The word disseminate has also been defined in the explanation
          to mean - making the information known or communicating the
          information to the public through notice boards, newspapers, public
          announcements, media broadcasts, the internet, etc. It is, therefore, clear
          from a plain reading of 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act that the information,
          which a public authority is obliged to publish under the said section
          should be made available to the public and specifically through the
          internet. There is no denying that the petitioner is duty bound by virtue
          of the provisions of 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act to publish the information
          indicated in 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and 
4(1)(c)
 on its website so that the public
          have minimum resort to the use of the 
RTI Act
 to obtain the
          information."



Furthermore, High Court of Delhi in the decision of 
General Manager Finance Air
India Ltd & Anr v. Virender Singh, LPA No.
 205/2012, Decided On: 16.07.2012
had held as under:




      "8. 
The RTI Act
, as per its preamble was enacted to enable the citizens to
          secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in
          order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of
          every public authority. An informed citizenry and transparency of
          information have been spelled out as vital to democracy and to contain
          corruption and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities
          accountable to the governed. The said legislation is undoubtedly one of
          the most significant enactments of independent India and a landmark in
          governance. The spirit of the legislation is further evident from various
          provisions thereof which require public authorities to:

         A. Publish inter alia:

         i) the procedure followed in the decision making process;

         ii) the norms for the discharge of its functions;

         iii) rules, regulations, instructions manuals and records used by its
           employees in discharging of its functions;

         iv) the manner and execution of subsidy programmes including the
           amounts allocated and the details of beneficiaries of such programmes;

         v) the particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or authorizations
          granted. [see 
Section 4(1) (b)
, (iii), (iv), (v); (xii) & (xiii)].



                                                                        Page 18 of 24


                     B. Suo moto provide to the public at regular intervals as much information
                     as possible [see 
Section 4(2)
]."

          .......



          DECISION:



          Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by the Appellant
          and in the light of the aforementioned judgments as also the earlier decision of the
          Commission       in     a    similar    subject-      matter     in    Appeal      No.
          CIC/DOURD/A/2017/148703-BJ dated 07.03.2019, the Commission directs the
          Respondent to re-examine the RTI application and furnish a point-wise available
          information to the Appellant as sought in the RTI application as per the provisions
          of the 
RTI Act, 2005
, within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt of this
          order. The Commission also advises the Respondent Public Authority (L&DO) to
          examine the RTI application and suo motu place the details of all leased properties
          in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act, 2005 on its website
          taking into consideration the larger public interest involved in the matter as ordered
          in its earlier decision in Appeal No.:- CIC/DOURD/A/2017/148703-BJ dated
          07.03.2019.



          The Appeal stands disposed with the above direction. "



3. The Commission concedes with the 
ratio 
laid down in
 the aforementioned
   decision and upholds the submission of the appellant in respect of the same.



4. As opposed to the above, the PIO argued that the situation in the instant matter is
   different as Consulate General of India in Sydney must follow the privacy-law of
   Australia while handling RTI Applications. Since copies of the lease deeds or
   lease agreements signed by the CGI at Sydney are with Australian parties,
   providing the same will violate the Privacy Act of 1988 of Australia.



5. Adverting to the ratio laid down above and taking into account the submissions
   of both the parties, Commission observes that the purpose of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 is
   to promote transparency and probity. Now, even if Commission concedes with
   the contention raised by the PIO with regards to violation of Privacy Act of 1988
   of Australia, the blanket denial of the same is incorrect. Nevertheless, the
   Commission deems it expedient to highlight that 
section 10
 of the RTI Act, 2005
   was incorporated to tackle such complications. It is observed that as per 
Section
   10
 of the RTI Act, 2005 all such information which could create any sort of
   impediment could be severed to provide the remaining information. 
In this
   context, a reference was made to the decision of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi
   in its decision dated 7/10/2013 [W.P. (C) 4079/2013 
Union Public Service
   Commission vs. G S Sandhu
] wherein while observing that denial of notings
   altogether was not justified directed to block the name, designation or any other

                                                                                   Page 19 of 24

    indication which disclose or tend to disclose the identity of author, it was held as
   under:




          "In fact the order passed by the Information Commissioner seeks to rely
          upon 
section 10
, which permits withholding of certain portions of
          information by applying severability principle. The order of the
          Information Commissioner takes care of the apprehension of the
          petitioner."



                                                              --(Emphasis supplied)--



6. As regards to invocation of 
section 8(1)(a)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 by the PIO for the
   denial of relevant information, the Commission at the outset, deems it expedient to
   quote 
section 8(1)(a)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 which exempt disclosure of the
   following information:



 
Section 8(1)(a)
: when disclosure of information would prejudicially affect
          the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security, strategic, scientific or
          economic interests of the State, relation with foreign State or lead to
          incitement of an offence; .



7. Adverting to the supra, it is expedient to note that the Respondents has merely
   cited the above provisions of 
Section 8(1)(a)
 of RTI Act, 2005 but failed to
   support their contention with any valid justification about applicability of the
   above exemption in this case. The Respondent is unable to explain how disclosure
   of a lease agreement which indeed is merely a commercial document could
   prejudicially affect the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security, strategic,
   scientific or economic interests of the State, relation with foreign State or lead to
   incitement of an offence. Thus, the arguments placed forth by the respondent
   cannot be entertained and are rejected.



8. As regards to contention raised by the PIO at para 7 of the written submission
   dated 10.05.2022, wherein he has argued that certain proceedings on departmental
   enquiry against the Appellant are stayed by CAT vide its order dated 23.10.2018
   and further, a reference was drawn by them to the full-bench verdict of this
   Commission dated 27.07.2019 in case no. CIC/AT/A/2008/00025 wherein it was
   held that :



                                                                            Page 20 of 24


 9. Upon scrutiny of the aforesaid order, the Commission observes that it is the
   contention of the PIO that since there is a pending litigation between both the
   parties, the information pertaining to the same can be held in confidence.
   Therefore, the moot question to adjudicate upon is whether the court case being
   sub judice between both the parties can be a ground to withhold the information
   in confidence.



10. Adverting to the supra, the Commission observes that 
Section 8(1)(b)
 of the RTI
    Act clearly stipulates that the only condition when information can be withheld
    for pendency of a Court case is when there is a restraint order of the Court from
    disclosure of such information. Section 8(1)(b) of the RTI Act reads as:



          (b) information which has been expressly forbidden to be published by any
          court of law or tribunal or the disclosure of which may constitute contempt
          of court;



11. Further, it may be noted that there is no provision in 
RTI Act
 which allows
    denial of information on the grounds of being sub-judice. 
In this regard,


                                                                          Page 21 of 24

    Commission relies on an order of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter
   of 
MCD vs. R.K. Jain [W.P.(C
) no. 14120/2009]. The relevant extract of the
   order is reproduced hereunder:




          "the matter being sub judice before a court is not one of the categories of
          information which is exempt from disclosure under any of the clauses of
          
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act." Hence, merely stating that a matter is sub-
          judice would not be a sufficient ground for withholding information under
          the 
RTI Act
"



12. Since there is no such Court order placed forth by the PIO, hence there is no
    reason for denial of information because of alleged pendency of litigation
    between parties. The Commission doesn't find any merit in the argument of the
    PIO averred in para 7 of his Written submissions.



13. Further, the Commission takes into account the submission of the appellant
    stating that the relevant lease deeds are sought to substantiate his matter before
    the Court of Law and that disclosure of information may facilitate the exercise of
    this right. In view of the same, the Commission referred to the decision of
    Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in its decision in Sudhiranjan Senapati in W.P. (C)
    7048/2011 dated 05.03.2013 had held as under:-



          "12.1 It appears 
in that case
 the petitioner, who was being criminally prosecuted for
          having fraudulently reduced the quantum of excise duty to be paid by an assessee,
          while passing an adjudication order, had sought information with regard to: note sheets;
          correspondence obtaining qua the material in the file of the CBI; correspondence in the
          file of the CVC pertaining to the matter; and correspondence in the file of the
          Department of Vigilance, CBES.



          13.2     A close perusal of the nature of information sought seems to suggest that
          much of it may have been material collected during the course of investigation, the
          disclosure of which could have perhaps hampered the prosecution of the petitioner.



 
13. Therefore, in my view, in such like cases when, the State takes a stand the
          information cannot be disclosed; while dilating on its stand in that behalf, the State
          would necessarily have to, deal with the aspect as to how the information sought, is of
          such a nature, that it could impede prosecution. Much would thus depend on the nature
          of information sought, in respect of which, a clear stand needs to be taken by the State,
          while declining the information. The burden in this regard is on the State. [see 
B.S.
          Mathur Vs. Public Information Officer of Delhi High
 Court, 180 (2011) DLT 303]


          14. With the aforesaid observations in place, the writ petition is allowed. The order of
          the CIC is set aside. The respondents will supply the information sought for by the
          petitioner within three weeks from today, after redacting names of officers who wrote
          the notes or made entries in the concerned files."



                                                                                           Page 22 of 24


 
14. Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of 
Union of India vs.
    D.N. Kar
 in W.P. (C) 4056 of 2008 and CM Nos. 7869 and 10885 of 2008 dated
    14.09.2010, had held as under:


       "11. In the considered view of this Court, the above submissions are misconceived. The Respondent
       is seeking information only about himself being included in the Agreed List. There is no question
       of the Department invoking the right to privacy of the Respondent to deny him information
       concerning him which is held by them. The apprehension that such information may tarnish the
       reputation of the Respondent is also misconceived. It is also the Respondent himself who is asking
       the information on the material on the basis of which his name was included in the "Agreed List".

       Moreover, the period during which the Respondent's name was included in the "Agreed List" has
       long come to an end. The period during which he was kept under surveillance is over. By disclosing
       to the Respondent, the material on the basis of which his name was included in the Agreed List,
       there is no danger of, the purpose of placing him under surveillance, being defeated.



       12. As regard inputs that might have been given to the Department by certain persons in a fiduciary
       capacity, this Court finds that the CIC has, in its impugned order dated 3rd April 2008, adequately
       accounted for such contingency. It has been directed by the CIC that the CPIO is free to withhold
       the names of the officials who might have provided critical inputs and recommended the inclusion
       of the Respondent's name in the Agreed List. Further, the CPIO has also been permitted by the CIC
       to withhold the name of the complainant, if any, in the matter.



       13. This Court concurs with the view expressed by the CIC that if the Respondent feels that
       his name was wrongly included in the Agreed List for three years continuously and that such
       inclusion is indeed a stigma on his career and, therefore, he wishes to prove his innocence, he
       cannot be deprived of such an opportunity by withholding the material on the basis of which
       his name was so included. Adequate safeguards have already been provided for by the CIC in
       its impugned order. In the circumstances, there can be no justification for the Petitioner to
       deny the Respondent the information sought by him."



                                                                              (Emphasis Supplied)



15. Adverting to the aforementioned ratios 
laid down by
 Hon'ble Supreme Court of
    India as well as various Hon'ble High Courts and upon closed scrutiny of the
    written submissions of both the parties, the Commission doesn't find any merits
    in the arguments raised by the PIO for complete denial of the information sought
    in the instant RTI Application. Further, blanket denial of such information which
    is vital for the appellant to substantiate his defence in the court of law would be a
    sheer violation of the Principle of Natural Justice.



16. In view of the foregoing, the Commission concedes with the prayer of the
    appellant and directs the PIO to provide the copies of the lease deeds as sought
    by him in his instant RTI Application for the period between 2013-16, free of
    cost. PIO must redact/black out the personal/private information, if any, as per
    
section 10
 of the RTI Act, 2005 and provide information as permissible under the
    said Act.



                                                                                            Page 23 of 24


 17. The said directions of the Commission must be complied within 30 days from the
    date of receipt of this order and compliance report to this effect be duly sent to
    the Commission by the PIO.



   No further action lies.



                        The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                             Heeralal Samariya (हीरालाल सामररया)
                                          Information Commissioner (सूचना आयुक्त)

   Authenticated true copy
   (अनिप्रमानणतसत्यानपतप्रनत)



   Ram Parkash Grover (रामप्रकाशग्रोवर)
   Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
   011-26180514





                                                                           Page 24 of 24