[Cites 
22
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Samir Sardana vs Kandla Special Economic Zone on 10 August, 2020


Author: 
Vanaja N Sarna


Bench: 
Vanaja N Sarna


                             क य सुचना आयोग
                    CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
                                  बाबा गंगनाथ माग
                             Baba Gangnath Marg
                         मुिनरका, नई द ली - 110067
                         Munirka, New Delhi-110067

                                  File No.: CIC/KSEZO/A/2019/653427+653429

In the matter of:
Samir Sardana
                                                               ... Appellant
                                        VS
CPIO / Dy. Commissioner
Kandla Special Economic Zone,
Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
Gandhidham, Kutch, Guajarat - 370 230
                                                               ...Respondent


RTI application filed on            :   26/07/2019
CPIO replied on                     :   19/08/2019,28/08/2019, --/08/2019
First appeal filed on               :   04/09/2019
First Appellate Authority order     :   26/09/2019
Second appeal filed on              :   08/10/2019
Date of Hearing                     :   05/08/2020
Date of Decision                    :   05/08/2020

The following were present:
Appellant: Present over phone

Respondent: Shri Surender Meena, Appraiser and APIO, present over phone

Information Sought:



The appellant has sought the following information.



1. Audits and Consultants:



                                         1


 Provide the details of the audits carried out w.r .t. the KASEZ operations (in the
last 7 years, besides the statutory audits under applicable statutes, as under:



    Nature and Type of Audit (Energy/Efficiency /Internal/Safety/ Insurance/
     Environmental /CAG / Hazardous Cargo etc); Date of Audit; Period
     covered by the Audit; Name of Auditor; Scope of Adult.



2.Provide the details of the Management Consultants engaged for KASEZ
operations (In India and overseas - including subsidiaries and JV), in the last 7
years, besides IT Consulting assignments, as under


    Nature and Type of Consulting assignment (strategy/ bank finance,
     operational improvement/ Energy/ Efficiency/ Internal/Safety/
     Insurance/ Environmental /CAG / Hazardous Cargo etc); Date of
     Consulting assignment; Period covered by the Consulting assignment;
     Name of Management Consultant; Scope of Consulting assignment.



3.Private Sector Benchmarking

PIO to confirm whether the KASEZ has engaged any 3rd party or agency to
benchmark the financial and operational performance of KASEZ with the
private sector or Government owned entities in the SEZ business in India and
overseas, in the last 7 years, as under:



    If yes, provide the date of such engagement, name of the agency or
     Team, scope of work of the said engagement and fees paid to the said
     agency


4.PIO to confirm whether the Ministry of Commerce has engaged any 3rd party
or agency to benchmark the financial and operational performance of KASEZ
with the private sector or Government owned entities in the SEZ business in
India and overseas, in the last 7 years, as under:



    If yes, give the date of such engagement, name of the agency or Team,
     scope of work of the said engagement and fees paid to the said agency


5. And other related information.



Grounds for Second appeal
The CPIO has denied providing the desired information.



                                        2


 Submissions made by Appellant and Respondent during Hearing:

The appellant during the hearing reiterated that his written submissions
contain very critical, important and strategic information and hence, should be
considered in toto. However, after going through his e-mails the Commission
could not find any substantial submissions in the trail of emails.
Shri Arun Kumar, CPIO, KASEZ sent written submissions in respect of case no.
CIC/KSEZO/A/2019/653427 & CIC/KSEZO/A/2019/653429 and submitted that
in this connection, the CPIO has followed the direction of the FAA given
in Order No. 01/2019-20/APL/RTI/KASEZ DATED: 26/30.09.2019 and
transferred the application
 u/s 6(3)
 of RTI Act to the concerned Public
Authorities. In this regards, copy of transferring the application
 u/s 6(3)
 of RTI
Act to other Public Authorities and reply received from such Public Authorities,
if any, were submitted for necessary action.

The CPIO vide his Written submission also responded in respect of 1st, 2nd & 3rd
representation       of    the     appellant      for     hearing     of     case
CIC/KASEZO/A/2019/653429 & CIC/ KASEZO/A/ 2019/653427. His submissions
read as follows:

POINT No. 10


Part-1: PIO has made incomplete replies to some information requirements
        on some critical parameters.

He submitted that the RTI application of the appellant was forwarded to
different sections /branches (deemed PIO) of this office under 
section 5(4)
 of
RTI Act, 2005 as the required information was not held with the CPIO. Based
on the reply received from the concerned deemed PIOs, the CPIO had provided
the information to the appellant. Each deemed PIO has provided the point
wise information held with them and the information which was not
available/held by them were not provided to the CPIO & this was specifically
mentioned in the CPIO's reply dated 30.08.2019. Further, it is to mention
that the deemed PIOs also can only provide information which is held by them
in material form and they are not supposed to create information under 
RTI
Act
.



                                        3


 Part -2 : False replies by PIO
The deemed PIOs can only provide information which is held by them in
material form and they are not supposed to create information under the 
RTI
Act
. Loss making /defunct units were not operational and had not submitted
APR on regular basis, thus the same were not available with the deemed PIOs
& accordingly, it has been replied by them that there were no non-operational
unit and hence the APR were not available.

Part-3 : Illegal rejection under 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of RTI Act,2005
Information was sought to provide ITCHS tariff code of the material, spare
item, goods & services exported by each KASEZ Unit, which were denied under

Section 8(1)(d)
 of RTI Act,2005 since it relates to commercial confidence, trade
secrets or intellectual property and disclosure of the same would harm the
competitive position of third party. However, it is submitted that general
description of authorised operation (viz. Manufacture/trader/warehousing
unit, details of manufacturing item etc) of each KASEZ Units are already
available in public domain on KASEZ website under the heading "List of
working Unit". Further, revealing the technical detailed information of each
unit would harm their competitive position, hence they were rejected under

Section 8(1)(d)
 of RTI Act,2005 for being commercial confidence, trade secrets
or intellectual property. For example there are many pharmaceutical units
under KASEZ who are manufacturing medicines and doing some research work
on medicine including present pandemic COVID-19.



Part-4 : Incorrect transfer made by PIO under 
Section 6(3)
 of RTI Act - after
         the FAA Order
In compliance with the FAA Order dated 26/30.09.2019, the CPIO has
transferred the application to different Public Authorities such as CBIC, CBDT,
DRI, ED etc as per Annexure-IX of the 1st written submission made vide this
office letter F.No. KASEZ/CIC/Appeal/01/2020-21/17779 dated 21.07.2020,
which was also emailed to CIC & the appellant on 24.07.2020 & 31.07.2020 as
well.

Part-5 : PIO has not updated the 
Section 4(1)
 data
It is pertinent to mention here that proactive disclosure under 
Section 4
 of the
RTI Act is not under the domain of the CPIO but the nodal officer appointed by
the public authority under the the 
RTI Act
. In compliance with the FAA order
dated 26/30.09.2020 the direction was given to the Nodal officer by the FAA
and the same has been duly complied with.

                                       4


 Part-6 : No transfer made under 
Section 6(3)
 of RTI Act
Under Para 2 of DoPT OM No. NO.10/2/2008-IR dated 12.06.2008, the
obligation to address the RTI application to the Concerned Public Authority
under 
Section 6(1)
 of RTI Act, 2005 is on the RTI applicant itself and PIO is
under no obligation           to transfer the RTI application to multiple
department/public authorities
Observations:

At the outset it was found pertinent to mention here that the appellant was
sending lengthy written submissions despite the fact that he already had filed a
detailed second appeal and in his RTI application itself he cited several case
laws to support his claim for information. The appellant is therefore advised to
understand the limited resources of the Commission and to behave
responsibly in future and try to be specific and precise.
Taking into consideration the voluminous information sought by the appellant
in his single RTI application, the Commission finds it important to refer to Rule
3 of the RTI Rules 2012 which reads as follows:

       3. Application Fee.--An application under sub-section (1) of 
Section 6
 of
       the Act shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees ten and shall ordinarily
       not contain more than five hundred words, excluding annexures,
       containing address of the Central Public Information Officer and that of
       the applicant: Provided that no application shall be rejected only on the
       ground that it contains more than five hundred words.

Keeping in view the above rule, it transpires that it is expected from the RTI
applicant/ citizen that they would make efforts to file a RTI application
containing information sought within the limit of five hundred words. A citizen
is one of the principal pillars of the country and is entitled to enjoy all the legal
rights and privileges granted by the Government but is also obliged to obey its
laws and to perform his or her duties as called upon. We are all citizens of our
country and as rights and duties are co-related, one should be mindful of one's
duties towards the country. As the appellant appears to be a responsible
citizen who is concerned about the functioning of the public authorities, it
implies that he knows his duty adequately and will comply with the rules to
ensure minimum exhaustion of the resources of the Commission as well as the
public authorities.



In view of the same, it is expected that in future he will file RTI applications
keeping in view the limitations.

                                         5


 It was noted that the appellant in his second appeal mentioned that the PIO of
KASEZ had sent three replies on 3 different dates. The 1st PIO reply is dated
19.08.2019, wherein, the PIO has asked for a fee of some amount. The
appellant asked what information is provided, what information is rejected and
what are the number of pages of each information and why the information is
not available in e-format and why the information is not available on the portal

u/s 4
 of the RTI Act by an email sent to the PIO.

He further submitted that the 2nd reply of the PIO dated 28.08.2019, was the
explanation of the fees - but still the PIO reply and the reason for information
refused or rejected and e-data and why the data was not listed in 
section 4
 of
the RTI Act was not there.

Furthermore, he pointed out that the 3rd reply of the PIO was dated
30.08.2019 (by email) which gave a para by para reply/reponse - although
some replies were illegal - but the PIO provided the information free of cost -
for which he had asked for fees in the 1st reply.

The appellant further contended that the PIO admitted in the letter that the
NODAL PIO of KASEZ had failed to upload the data
 u/s 4(1)(b)
 of the RTI Act.
The RTI application was received by the KASEZ on the 8th of August,2019 - so it
may be said that even the 3rd reply of the PIO was received in 30 days and the
PIO has provided all the agreed information free of cost in e-format - by email
and sent some by speed post. The FAA order has also agreed that 
section
4(1)(b)
 data was not uploaded. The FAA order has provided no reasons for 3
PIO replies. The FAA order has also agreed that the PIO failed to make the

section 6(3)
 transfers. The FAA order has failed to explain as to why the
information was rejected
 u/s 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act. The FAA has not
addressed at all, some of the specific issues raised in the grounds of appeal.
The PIO has rejected some of the information sought by the appellant, as
under:

He further contested that the PIO has rejected the following information
 u/s
8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act.

PIO to confirm that it can provide the itc tarriff codes of the material and
spares items and goods and services exported by each KASEZ unit from the
KASEZ misleading/false information. The PIO has made replies which make no
sense w.r.t the understated information, the PIO replies stating that the reply
for "this section" (the applicant is made to the KASEZ as a whole and not to any
specific section). The information sought was regarding whether KASEZ has

                                       6

 engaged any 3rd party or agency to Benchmark the financial and operational
performance of KASEZ with the private sector or Government owned entitites
in the SEZ business in India and overseas in the last 7 years. The PIO reply- was
that this section has not engaged any third party or agency to benchmark the
financial and operational performance of KASEZ with the private sector or
Government owned entities.

He further submitted that the PIO has made no transfer
 u/s 6(3)
of the RTI Act
with respect to the following information requirements as under:

(Point no. is 2 As per CPIOs reply)

(b) Have Ministry of Commerce             engaged any 3rd party or agency to
benchmark the financial and operational performance of KASEZ with private
sector or Government owned entities in the SEZ business in India and overseas,
in the last 7 years?

If yes, the date of such engagement, name of agency or Team, scope of work of
the said engagement and fees paid to the said agency:

 c) Have any Government or Private Entity engaged any 3rd party or agency to
benchmark the financial and operational performance of KASEZ with private
sector or Government owned entities in the SEZ business in India and overseas,
in the last 7 years If yes, the date of such engagement, name of the agency or
Team, scope of work of the said engagement and fees paid to the said agency:

d) If the KASEZ has done a benchmarking of the financial and operational
performance of KASEZ, in the SEZ business in India and Overseas, in the last 5
years?

- This section has not done any benchmarking of financial and operational
performance of KASEZ, in the SEZ business in India and Overseas, in the last 5
years.

If yes, the date of such engagement, name of the agency or Team, scope of
work of the said engagement:

e) If the Ministry of Commerce has done a benchmarking of the financial and
operational performance of KASEZ, in the SEZ business in India and overseas, in
the last 5 years?

If yes, the date of such engagement, name of the agency or Team, scope of
work of the said engagement

(Point no. is 8 as per CPIO's reply)
Information w.r.t. cases of "Raids" by DRI/Income Tax and Customs on the SEZ
or the SEZ Units in the last 3 years.

                                       7


 He further submitted that In Paras 4 and 5 of the PIO's reply it was mentioned
as Not available with this concerned section, whereas the query was related to
Annual Reports of the Developers and Co-Developers of KASEZ.



(Point no. is 5 as per CPIO's reply)
The appellant contested that the PIO has provided information w.r.t. FIR.PIO
HAS NOT stated that besides the 2 cases there was no enquiry initiated on any
KASEZ staff (Enquiry precedes FIR for several types of offences.



The critical facts which he was pressing for during the hearing also are as
follows:

1.The PIO has illegally rejected some of the critical information sought, as
stated in para 1.2 above and has also made 3 PIO replies which is per se illegal

2.It is in the letter of the law and several case laws that reasons for rejection
should be specific and with some basis and logic as under :

PIO has not stated the specific reasons and rationale for the rejection of the
RTI Application - on the grounds of generic nature DOPT Circular -
F.No.10/1/2013-IR- dated the 6th of October,2015 states that the PIO has to
state the "detailed reasons for refusal or rejection" - and the same is also
supported by "Section

2. 4(1)(d)" of the 
RTI Act,2005

Non-Provision of Reasons for Rejection, is a Violation of 
Section 7(8)(i)
, of the
RTI Act,2005
Non-Provision of Reasons for Rejection, is a Violation of 
Section 4(1)(d)
, of the
RTI Act,2005
Non-Provision of Reasons for Rejection is a violation of SC Judgments, as
under:

The SC held that "reasons" for administrative decisions and quasi judicial
decisions "must be recorded in detail", to "support the conclusions", if they
affect anyone "prejudicially", and "must be communicated" to the concerned
person Civil Appeal No. 9095 of 2012 (Arising out of SLP(C) No.7529 of 2009) in
the case of Manohar s/o Manikrao Anchule Vs.State of Maharashtra & Anr.

        Refusing information w/o reason and w/o providing the justification of
        the section and its applicability to the information sought is a sign of
        malafide intent by the PIO, and liable to penalty - as per CIC/HC case
        laws - illustrated below for 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act,2005.

                                       8


 
He further referred to the order of the Hon'ble High Court Of Delhi In W. P. (C)
12428/2009 & Cm Appl 12874/2009 Deputy Commissioner Of Police Versus
D.K.Sharma -Judgment Dated 15-12-2010
       "This Court is inclined to concur with the view expressed by the CIC that
       in W.P. (Civil) 12428/2009 order to deny the information under the 
RTI
       Act
 the authority concerned would have to show a justification with
       reference to one of the specific clauses under 
Section 8 (1)
 of the RTI Act
       Hon'ble High Court of Kerala in 
Ibrahim Kunju v. State of Kerala
 AIR 1970
       Ker 65. If no reasons are given in the appellate orders, then it is injustice
       to the natural justice because quasi judicial obligations are giving
       reasons for order, since justice is not expected to wear the inscrutable
       face of a sphinx"


He further stated that the information sought was neither vague nor
ambiguous and was specific
He tried to justify his pleadings by stating that the information sought by the
RTI Applicant is of "vital importance" and in Public Interest and should be in
the public domain considering the dismal state of exports and the costs to the
state to increase exports via SEZs and the specific frauds therein. The
Commission finds it a mere oral allegation which is unsubstantiated and hence
not proved.

However, the appellant went on submitting that the pathetic state of the
exports from the SEZ is assessed by the number of non-operative units and the
poor capacity utilisation of the SEZ units - information of which is in public and
national interest. The planning of the GOI is highlighted by the fact that the
GOI has done no benchmarking of the operations of the SEZ per se, and the
SEZ units within - for each sector with comparable peers, in India and the
global competition
If a sector, say X, exists in a SEZ in a specific maritime geography and its global
export hub, is in Country A, and the GOI has not been benchmarking the
operating parameters of the Indian SEZ and the SEZ units of that sector (X),
every 3 years - then the said SEZ units in sector X, in India, will definitely cease
to exist, or be in a state of terminal decline or exist at the mercy of competitors
With the miserable performance of the Indian Rupee, and its impact of
reduction in Dollarised Rupee costs payable to the SEZ authority by the SEZ
units - why are the exports from the SEZs still a failure In addition, in several
sectors, the rupee costs paid by the SEZ units to the SEZ Authority, are not the
determinant for operating and financial viability of the SEZ units.

                                         9


 He further argued that in essence, the GOI has utterly failed to provide a level
playing field to exporters in this nation, in terms of admin costs, operating cost
neutrality, financing costs, effective logistics costs and fiscal red tape and
procedures
The centres of manufacturing excellence near SEZs (For CMT/Job
work/Material and Labour sourcing) are not cost effective - as there is no
synergy between the SEZ and the Industrial planning and policy
The strategy of the GOI is highlighted by the fact that the GOI has engaged no 3
rd party to analyse the inefficiency of the operating parameters of the SEZ , per
se, and the SEZ units within the SEZ - for each sector within it , with
comparable peers in India, and the global competition
What planning and strategy will the GOI do, if it has no formal analysis of the
specific operating costs, parameters, management and other issues, which
explain the dismal state of the SEZ units by sector, scale and management
quality.

The dismal state of the GOI planning is that the GOI has not properly planned
the sector profile of the units in each SEZ, to ensure that the right sectors are
in the appropriate geography, in the right SEZ, to minimise the net logistics
costs on the EXIM chain, and minimise the inward material logistics costs -
considering the future dislocations in inward and external material sources and
options of transhipment and alternative export markets.
Several SEZs invest limited equity in SEZ units and common service providers,
like banks, facilities, hotels, accounting firms etc, as a demonstration of their
stake in the SEZ and their strategic inputs in the planning and operation of the
same - which is then used to lower the lease charges etc - which is completely
absent in India.

 All of the above is to be seen in the light of the fact that the SEZ has no data of
the financial or operating performance of the SEZ units, loss making units or
even the financial and operating performance of the Developers of the SEZ -
and is naturally not concerned with the losses or the financial performance of
the SEZ units therein.

The peculiar pattern of CMT and Job workers of key sectors such as Gold and
Diamond jewellers, with multiple movement of stocks at different processors
o/s the SEZ - is not the norm for Gems and Jewellery SEZs or SEZ units - and
represents an abnormal industrial agglomeration with a planned and structural
dislocation in manufacturing and processing operations - which cannot be
solely for the purposes of manufacturing and commercial efficiency.

                                        10


 Information on raids and prosecutions is critical especially in sectors with high
import duties (on merit mode) for inputs, customised finished goods (wherein
DRI/Customs cannot assess over invoicing),frequent movements to and from 3
rd party processors (which makes the case for wastages and losses in SION and
disappearing materials), materials where the EXIM transit time is a few hours
and the logistics costs are less than 1% of CIF/FOB rates, inputs and outputs
with marked diferences in rates of different grades of items and offgrades, per
se, warehousing artificial losses, amortisable costs , bad debts and write offs in
select SEZs (to be used for 3rd party exports or mergers to obviate tax on SEZ
profits),items where the SEZ units are well aware of the sampling and test
checks of the DRI and Customs at the SEZ for the inputs and outputs etc.
The Gems and Jewellery industry is run by cartels from a particular community
spread from Western India to North America,EU,East Asia,West Asia and Africa
and is a well coordinated money laundering and smuggling operation from the
state of rough diamonds and raw gold, to the marketing of jewellery and
warehousing of processed and raw diamonds, the banking chain, raters and
the chain of associate and front companies - which is all the more insidious, as
all the data with DRI/ED/Customs/Interpol used by the Indian State for
surveillance is all originate from the overseas counterparts and partners of the
Indian traders located in India (Who are in many cases - in spirit the
same de facto entity owners)
The premise that Indians are the least cost labour source for the jewellery
sector and their informal working style (w/o documentation, using informal
labour and in slum style conditions) is an innovative marvel of Indian Genius, is
a pathetic fraud and deception, and the entire array of fiscal and monetary
sops for this sector (including SEZ) Allows the sector to generate financial
buffers via money laundering, tax arbitrage, treasury operations, merchanting
exports, accomodation financing , cash financing, alternative fund transfers, FX
speculation, leveraging double and layered financing, defrauding Indian
Merchant exporters such as STC and MMTC, Credit insurance fraud etc. which
provide the sector the pricing edge in overseas markets ( via illegal, nefarious
and fraudulent means)

In his second appeal he sought the following relief:

    1. Penalty on the PIO ( under 
Section 19(8)(c)
, of the RTI Act,2005 )

    2. Dismissal of the PIO on account of illegal,deliberate,malafide and
        baseless reply

                                       11


      3. Administrative action and/strictures, against the PIO (under 
Section
        20(2)
 , of the RTI Act,2005 )

     4. Recommendation to the KASEZ and the GOI - Ministry of Commerce ,
        for administrative action and/strictures, against the PIO

     5. Impose Maximum Penalty, on the PIO under 
Section 20(1)
 ,of the RTI
        Act,2005

     6. Direct the Respondents to refund the Application fee paid by
        Complainant while submitting RTI Application, as per section (7)(6) of
        the RTI Act

     7. Provide the information free of cost u/s 7(6) of the RTI Act

     8. Invoke its powers under the 
RTI Act
 to issue any other direction or
        recommendation as it may deem appropriate.

     9. Direct the public authority to make entry in Service Book/Annual
     Performance Appraisal Report of the Respondents for defying the
     provisions of the Act Compensation for the Appellant for pecuniary and
     other loss
He again mentioned the Grounds for Relief against the PIO, as under:
Ground No.1 - 3 PIO Reply to 1 RTI Application
The PIO has made 3 PIO replies to 1 RTI Application
Ground No.2 - PIO has made No Transfer U/S 6(3) of the 
RTI Act

The PIO has not made Transfers U/S 6(3) of the 
RTI Act

Ground No.3 - The PIO has made Misleading Replies and not made 
Section 4

Disclosures
The PIO has made Misleading Replies w.r.t some Information requirements
Ground No.4 - The PIO has made no replies to some Information requirements
The PIO has made no replies to some Information requirements which is a
Deemed rejection under 
Section 7(2)
 of the RTI Act
Ground No.5 - The PIO has made Illegal Rejection U/S 8(1)(d) of the 
RTI Act

The PIO has made an Illegal, Baseless, Foolish and Malafide rejection
 u/s
8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act
It is also pertinent to mention here that his second appeal was also abnormally
lengthy with same sort of submissions, and hence the relevant paras which
were found to be the crux were mentioned above.



The Commission perused the RTI application of the appellant and observes
that the following information was sought by the appellant.



                                      12


        "1.1.This is a "RTI Application
 u/s 6(1)
" of the "
RTI Act, 2005
" - which
       can be transferred by you
 u/s 6(3)
 and 
5(4)
 to as many PIOs as you deem
       fit
       1.2..A copy of this RTI Application is being sent to you, "via e mail",
       which is allowed as per 
Section 6(1)
 of the RTI Act,2005
       1.3.The information is sought vide 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act,2005, as
       under:

       (f) "information" means any material in any form, including records,
       documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars,
       orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data
       material held in any electronic form and information relating to any
       private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any
       other law for the time being in force;

       1.4. .The information sought is provided in Para 6 below. In case, the PIO
       for any reason is unable to provide the information sought, the PIO is to
       allow the inspection and photographing of the said and related records -
       in order for the applicant to prepare, compile, collect and collate the
       information
       1.4.1..
Section 2(j)
 of the RTI Act on "Photographing"
       1.4.1.1.Kindly note what "
Section 2(j)
 of the RTI Act,2005",states w.r.t
       "Photographing information" w.r.t the inspection to be done at your
       office :

       iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes, video
       cassettes or in any other electronic mode or through printouts where
       such information is stored in a computer or in any other device;

       1.4.2.The "CIC case laws" on Photographing
       The "CIC case laws that allow photographing of any information or
       document", are given below :

       CIC Case Law - 1 -Central Information Commission Case Law -
       CIC/AD/A/09/00125
       Name of the Applicant : Mr.Sidharth Mishra
       Name of the Public Authority : BSNL, Cuttack
       1.4.3.The Judgment........

The Commission invokes 
Section 2(j) (iv)
 of the RTI Act to allow use of camera
by the Appellant to take photos of documents required. Accordingly, the CPIO
is directed to provide all the information as requested by the Appellant in his
RTI request dated 18.08.08 and also allow the use of photographic camera for

                                       13

 taking photographs of records in the file which the BSNL had agreed to show to
the Appellant. The information to be provided within 15 days of the receipt of
this Order.

3.2.The Information sought, as stated in Para 5 below, is sought in e-format, on
a CD or a Pen Drive,in MS-Word or Excel or any other format, as far as possible
(as all the data would be available with KASEZ in E-format or on SAP or ERP or
other Software Module)
3.3.PIO MAY NOTE THE CONTENTS OF PARA 6 TO PARA 11 OF THIS RTI
APPLICATION - BEFORE REJECTING ANY INFORMATION

4.Public Interest
4.1. The Information is sought in public interest

5. RTI Information Sought
5.1. The Following information is sought from the PIO, by the RTI Applicant

Audits and Consultants
 PIO to provide the details of the audits carried out w.r .t. the KASEZ operations
(in the last 7 years, BESIDES THE STATUTORY AUDITS UNDER APPLICABLE
STATUTES, as under:

Nature and Type of Audit
(Energy/Efficiency/Internal/Safety/Insurance/Environmental /CAG / Hazardous
Cargo etc)
Date of Audit
Period covered by the Audit
Name of Auditor
 Scope of Audit
PIO to provide the details of the Management Consultants engaged for KASEZ
operations (In India and overseas - including subsidiaries and JV),in the last 7
years, BESIDES IT Consulting assignments, as under:

Nature and Type of Consulting assignment (STRATEGY/ BANK FINANCE,
OPERATIONAL IMPROVEMENT/ Energy/Efficiency/Internal/Safety/Insurance/
Environmental /CAG / Hazardous Cargo etc)
 Date of Consulting assignment
Period covered by the Consulting assignment
Name of Management Consultant
Scope of Consulting assignment




                                       14

 Private Sector Benchmarking
PIO to confirm that the KASEZ has engaged any 3 rd party or agency to
benchmark the financial and operational performance of KASEZ with the
private sector or Government owned entities in the SEZ business in India and
overseas, in the last 7 years, as under:

 If Yes, the date of such engagement, name of the agency or Team, scope of
work of the said engagement and fees paid to the said agency
PIO to confirm that the MINISTRY OF COMMERCE has engaged any 3 rd party
or agency to benchmark the financial and operational performance of KASEZ
with the private sector or Government owned entities in the SEZ business in
India and overseas, in the last 7 years, as under:

 If Yes, the date of such engagement, name of the agency or Team, scope of
work of the said engagement and fees paid to the said agency
PIO to confirm that ANY GOVERNMENT OR PRIVATE ENTITY has engaged any 3
rd party or agency to benchmark the financial and operational performance of
KASEZ with the private sector or Government owned entities in the SEZ
business in India and overseas, in the last 7 years, as under:
If Yes, the date of such engagement, name of the agency or Team, scope of
work of the said engagement and fees paid to the said agency
PIO to confirm if the KASEZ has done a benchmarking of the financial and
operational performance of KASEZ , in the SEZ business in India and overseas,
in the last 5 years, as under:

If Yes, the date of such engagement, name of the KASEZ Team,scope of work of
the said engagement
PIO to confirm if the MINISTRY OF COMMERCE has done a benchmarking of
the financial and operational performance of KASEZ , in the SEZ business in
India and overseas, in the last 5 years, as under:

If Yes, the date of such engagement, name of the KASEZ Team,scope of work of
the said engagement
KASEZ Sources of Income
PIO to provide the schedule of OPERATIONAL INCOME (excluding investment
income - by types of income streams in the last 5 years, detailing each type of
income stream which amounts to 5% or more of the ANNUAL OPERATIONAL
INCOME (representatively illustrated, as under):
Land Charges
Lease Charges
Power Charges

                                      15

 Water Charges
Facilities Charges
Levies for AC units etc
Recoveries for ETP etc
Recoveries for Common Facilities
Recoveries for Administrative Facilities
Others (PIO is free to modify this list - as it is meant to be representative)
Annual Report, Accounts and APR (this information should be in the public
domain - free of cost)
PIO to provide the Annual Report of KASEZ for the last 3 years with the
Auditors Report, Financial Statements, Notes to Accounts, Directors Report etc
PIO to provide the Annual PERFORMANCE Report of KASEZ for the last 3 years
PIO to confirm that it has the annual reports of the Developers and Co-
Developers of KASEZ. If Yes, the PIO to provide the references of the FY w.r.t
which it has the Annual reports
PIO to confirm that it has the summary of the annual performance of the
Developers and Co-Developers of KASEZ
If Yes, the PIO to provide the references of the FY w.r.t which it has the said
summary of the annual performance
Equity Investments by KASEZ / Developers (since inception of the KASEZ )
PIO to confirm if KASEZ has made any EQUITY investments in any unit
operating in the KASEZ
If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the investee and the amount of the
investment
PIO to confirm if KASEZ has made any EQUITY investments in any ANCILLARY
SERVICES PROVIDER (BANK/CHA/LOGISTICS PROVIDER/ POWER PLANT/ETP
ETC) operating in the KASEZ
If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the investee and the amount of the
investment.

PIO to confirm if THE DEVELOPERS OF THE KASEZ have made any EQUITY
investments in any unit operating in the KASEZ
If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the investee and the amount of the
investment
PIO to confirm if THE DEVELOPERS OF THE KASEZ have made any EQUITY
investments in any ANCILLARY SERVICES PROVIDER (BANK/CHA/LOGISTICS
PROVIDER/ POWER PLANT/ETP ETC) operating in the KASEZ


                                      16

 If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the investee and the amount of the
investment
PIO to confirm if KASEZ has made any LOANS/ADVANCES in any unit operating
in the KASEZ
 If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the investee and the amount of the
investment. PIO to confirm if KASEZ has made any LOANS/ADVANCES in any
ANCILLARY SERVICES PROVIDER (BANK/CHA/LOGISTICS PROVIDER/POWER
PLANT/ETP ETC) operating in the KASEZ
If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the investee and the amount of the
investment
PIO to confirm if THE DEVELOPERS OF THE KASEZ have made any
LOANS/ADVANCES in any unit operating in the KASEZ
If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the investee and the amount of the
investment
PIO to confirm if THE DEVELOPERS OF THE KASEZ have made any
LOANS/ADVANCES             in     any      ANCILLARY      SERVICES        PROVIDER
(BANK/CHA/LOGISTICS PROVIDER/ POWER PLANT/ETP ETC) operating in the
KASEZ
If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the investee and the amount of the
investment Units (this information should be in the public domain - free of
cost)
PIO to provide the number of non-operational units as of 1st July,2019 and
their names
PIO to provide the number and names of the loss making units in the SEZ
(financial loss - not loss as computed under the 
IT Act
)
PIO to provide the number and names of the SERVICE INDUSTRY units in the
SEZ (ALONGWITH THE SERVICE INDUSTRY TYPES)
PIO to provide the names of the units in the Gems and Jewellery industry as of
1st July, 2019
PIO to confirm that it has the financial statements of ALL the units of the KASEZ
If Yes, the PIO is to indicate that the said statements are as of which date or FY
If Yes, the PIO is to indicate that the said statements are available in e-format
PIO to confirm that it has the summary of the financial performance (NOT THE
NFE) of ALL the units of the KASEZ
 If Yes, the PIO is to indicate that the said summaries, are as of which date or
FY
 If Yes, the PIO is to indicate that the said statements are available in e-format

                                       17

  PIO to confirm that it can provide the ITCHS tarriff codes of the material and
spares items and goods and services exported from the KASEZ
PIO to confirm that it can provide the ITCHS tarriff codes of the material and
spares items and goods and services exported by each KASEZ Unit from the
KASEZ Exim (this information should be in the public domain - free of cost)
PIO to provide the aggregate NON CAPITAL GOODS imports made into the SEZ
in each of the last 7 years
PIO to provide the aggregate CAPITAL GOODS imports made into the SEZ in
each of the last 7 years
PIO to provide the aggregate DIRECT PHYSICAL EXPORTS made FROM the SEZ
in each of the last 7 years
PIO to provide the aggregate DIRECT SERVICES EXPORTS made FROM the SEZ
in each of the last 7 years
PIO to provide the aggregate DIRECT PHYSICAL EXPORTS made FROM EOUs
DOING CMT OR JOB WORK FOR SEZ units in each of the last 7 years
 PIO to provide the aggregate DEEMED EXPORTS made FROM the SEZ in each
of the last 7 years
PIO to provide the aggregate DEEMED EXPORTS RELATED TO the SEZ in each of
the last 7 years
PIO to provide the aggregate value of sales from the SEZ into the DTA, in each
of the last 7 years Raids
PIO to provide the number of cases of raids by the DRI/ED/Income Tax and
Customs on the SEZ or the SEZ Units in the last 3 years
PIO to provide the names of the units in the SEZ against whom proceedings
have been initiated by the DRI/ED/Income Tax and Customs in the last 5 years
SEZ Units facing Criminal Prosecution
PIO to provide the names of the KASEZ units facing Criminal Prosecution
proceedings from the DRI/ED/ Customs or the Income Tax department as at
31st March,2019 (irrespective of whether or not the KASEZ Units have
contested the DRI process in the Courts or otherwise) Litigations
PIO to provide the number of ongoing legal cases in Indian Court, in which
KASEZ is a plaintiff/ defendant/petitioner/ respondent , as at 1st July,2019
PIO to provide the number of ongoing legal cases in Arbitration proceedings, in
which KASEZ is a plaintiff/ defendant/petitioner/ respondent , as at 1st
July,2019




                                      18

 PIO to provide the coordinates of ongoing legal cases (counter parties, case
number and the court particulars) in Indian Court, in which KASEZ is a plaintiff/
defendant/petitioner/ respondent , as at 1st July,2019
PIO to provide the coordinates of ongoing legal cases cases (counter parties
and the Arbitrator particulars)in Arbitration proceedings, in which KASEZ is a
plaintiff/ defendant/petitioner/ respondent , as at 1st July,2019 Vigilance
PIO to provide the number of cases wherein an FIR has been registered or an
enquiry conducted by any agency or department, on a staff of the KASEZ ,on a
matter related to corruption -

whether or not under the 
PC Act
 - AT ANY TIME IN THE LAST 7 YEARS
PIO to provide the NAMES OF THE KASEZ STAFF, wherein an FIR has been
registered or an enquiry conducted by any agency or department, on a staff of
the KASEZ , on a matter related to corruption - whether or not under the 
PC
Act
 - AT ANY TIME IN THE LAST 7 YEARS

The CIC observes that the appellant has repeatedly cited case laws relating to
every aspect of the 
RTI Act
 in his RTI application and appeal. Further, he kept
on submitting submissions after submissions. This is absolutely incorrect on
the part of the applicant. As mentioned earlier also he should be careful and
give regard to the provisions of the RTI Rules 2012. Moreover, he should
understand that citing case laws without justifying its relevance to the
present RTI application is a futile exercise.



Based on a perusal of the record it was noted that the CPIO vide letter dated
19.08.2019 claimed Rs 244 as photocopying charges for 122 pages. Thereafter,
the CPIO vide letter dated 28.08.2019 provided the index of total pages for
which the photocopying charges was sought in response to appellant's letters
and e-mail. However, a subsequent revised point-wise reply was given to the
appellant accepting his contentions in letter dated 29.08.2019.
The FAA vide order dated 30.09.2019 directed the CPIO to transfer points no.
2,4,5 and 8 of the RTI application to the concerned public authorities within 30
days.

The CPIO accordingly has transferred the same to different public authorities
vide letter dated 03/10/2019.

In so far as Sec 4 disclosure is concerned, the Commission cannot entertain the
same plea in this appeal as the appellant has mixed all his queries in one RTI
application with a single point no. 5 and the sub topics were not even

                                       19

 numbered, so it is difficult to identify which are applicable for suo moto
disclosure and which not.

It is also very crucial to mention here that the Commission heard 14 cases of
the appellant on 05.08.2020 and in each of the cases it is not possible to go
through the written submissions of the appellant word by word, his second
appeals/complaints, his RTI applications, first appeals etc.as all this material
submitted were extremely lengthy and technical. Therefore, the Commission
went in depth in the present case to address all the issues and contentions
raised by the appellant. Moreover, the same issues and contentions if made in
the later cases i.e case nos 652942, 653462 and 653434 shall not be discussed
again to avoid repetition and to save time and resources of the Commission.
In the present case he raised two major issues first that the CPIO had not
transferred the RTI application
 u/s 6(3)
 of the RTI Act and secondly the CPIO
erred in denying some of the information sought
 u/s 8 (1)(d)
 of the RTI Act.
One of the major issues found in the contentions of the applicant was that, he
was not specific about the points regarding which ones he is contesting, but he
again just mentioned the lengthy information sought.



The CPIO vide e-mail submitted certain documents which contain Sec 6(3)
letters. The first letter is F No. KASEZ/RTI/31/2019-20/7663-66 dated
03.10.2019 when it was verified it was noted that the same is related to the
present RTI application as the same was done in compliance with the order of
FAA dated 26.09.2019. It is further relevant to mention that the transfer
 u/s
6(3)
 was done by Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Commissioner of Customs or 1.
CPIO, Kandla Special Economic Zone to the CPIO, SEZ division, Department of
Commerce, Ministry of Commerce and Industry 2. The DDC KASEZ Authority
Secretariat, KASEZ, Gandhidham in respect of points no. 2,4,5 and 8 of the RTI
application. (verify the RTI dated 06.08.2019).
The second letter is F No. KASEZ/RTI/31/2019-20/7668-71 dated 03.10.2019
when it was verified it was noted that the same is related to the present RTI
application as the same was done in compliance with the order of FAA dated
26.09.2019. It is further relevant to mention that the transfer
 u/s 6(3)
 was
done by Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Commissioner of Customs or 1. CPIO, Kandla
Special Economic Zone to the CPIO, SEZ division, Department of Commerce,
Ministry of Commerce and Industry 2. The DDC KASEZ Authority Secretariat,
KASEZ, Gandhidham in respect of points no. 2,4,5 and 8 of the RTI application.
(verify the RTI dated 06.08.2019).

                                      20


 The third letter is F No. KASEZ/RTI/31/2019-20/7672-76 dated 03.10.2019
when it was verified it was noted that the same is related to the present RTI
application as the same was done in compliance with the order of FAA dated
26.09.2019. It is further relevant to mention that the transfer
 u/s 6(3)
 was
done by Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Commissioner of Customs or 1. CPIO, Kandla
Special Economic Zone to the CPIO, SEZ division, Department of Commerce,
Ministry of Commerce and Industry 2. The DDC KASEZ Authority Secretariat,
KASEZ, Gandhidham 3. The Accounts Officer, KASEZ, Gandhidham in respect of
points no. 2,4,5 and 8 of the RTI application. (verify the RTI dated 06.08.2019).



The fourth letter is F No. KASEZ/RTI/31/2019-20/7651-62 dated 03.10.2019
when it was verified it was noted that the same is related to the present RTI
application as the same was done in compliance with the order of FAA dated
26.09.2019. It is further relevant to mention that the transfer
 u/s 6(3)
 was
done by Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Commissioner of Customs or 1. The CPIO
Directorate of Enforcement Headquarter Office 2. The CPIO DRI Headquarters

3. The CPIO RTI Cell (CBDT) Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance 4. The
CPIO RTI Cell (CBIC), Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance in respect of
points no. 2,4,5 and 8 of the RTI application. (verify the RTI dated 06.08.2019).
 In view of the above letters, the Sec 6(3) transfer contentions of the appellant
failed to subsist at this point of time. However, the appellant may point out
that Sec 6(3) transfer was not done within 5 days. In view of the same it is
important to draw his attention to the multiple queries he asked from varied
sub topics and apparently which were related to more than one public
authority, therefore, here it is justifiable that the delay occurred and which
was not deliberate as all as the CPIO in the first reply offered the documents
whatever was readily available with him on payment of photocopying charges.
Moreover, the CPIO's plea that under Para 2 of DoPT OM No. NO.10/2/2008-
IR dated 12.06.2008, the obligation to address the RTI application to the
Concerned Public Authority under 
Section 6(1)
 of RTI Act, 2005 is on the RTI
applicant itself and PIO is under no obligation to transfer the RTI application to
multiple department/public authorities is also relevant.
Furthermore, a copy of the reply dated 29.10.2019 given by the CPIO, CBIC was
perused in which the CPIO replied as follows:

       "2. In this regard, with respect to point no. 8 of your RTI application, it is
       stated that the information sought pertains to the office of Chief

                                         21

       Commissioner of Customs, Gujarat Zone which has already been
      forwarded to them by Under Secretary, CX-9 Department of Revenue.
      Hence it is stated that information in respect of the above point may be
      treated as NIL at our end."

A copy of the reply dated 21.10.2019 given by the CPIO, Office of the
Development Commissioner, Kandla Special Economic Zone, Ministry of
Commerce and Industry, Gandhidham Kutch was perused in which the
following reply was given:

      "RTI application dated 06.08.2019 was transferred to Estate
      Management section of Kandla Special Economic Zone for providing the
      information, in respect of points no. 2,4 & 5
 u/s 6(3)
 of the RTI Act . The
      information pertaining to Estate Management section in respect of
      points no. 2, 4 & 5 is enclosed herewith."

A copy of the reply dated 24.10.2019 given by the CPIO, Ministry of Commerce
& Industry, Department of Commerce (SEZ Section) was perused in which the
following reply was given:

      "Point no.2 : No such third party or agency has been engaged to
      benchmark the financial and operational performance of KASEZ. Every
      Authority is liable to Accounts and Audit under Sec 37 of the 
SEZ Act,
      2005
. The units are required to achieve positive Net Foreign Exchange
      Earnings in terms of Rule 53 of the SEZ Rules and there is a provision of
      monitoring of performance of the unit by the approval Committee in
      terms of Rule 54 of the SEZ Rules as amended from time to time. 
The Act

      and rules may be referred to in the website: sezindia.nic.in. (Homepage-
      >GoI Acts/Policies->
SEZ Act
/SEZ Rules & Amendments).
      Points 4&5 : Information not held by this CPIO."

A copy of the reply dated 16.10.2019 given by the CPIO, Kandla Special
Economic Zone, Ministry of Commerce and Industry was perused in which the
following reply was given:

      "5. Equity investments by KASEZ/Developers (since inception of the
      KASEZ)

      a) PIO to confirm If KASEZ has made any Equity investments in any unit
          operating in the KASEZ-

          -No.
         If yes, provide the name of the investee and the amount of the
        Investment.

        -N.A

                                       22


 b) PIO to confirm if KASEZ has made any Equity investments in any
Ancillary Service Provider (Bank/CHA/Logistics Provider / Power
plant/ETP/etc) operating in the KASEZ.

-No
If Yes, provide the name of the investee and the amount of the
investment.

-N.A.

c) PIO to confirm if the developers of the KASEZ have made any Equity
investments in any unit operating in the KASEZ.

-Information related to KASEZ authority.

PIO to confirm if KASEZ has made any EQUITY investments in any
ANCILLARY SERVICES PROVIDER (BANK/CHA/LOGISTICS PROVIDER/
POWER PLANT/ETP ETC) operating in the KASEZ

-Information related to KASEZ authority.



If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the investee and the amount of
the investment.

-N.A

e) PIO to confirm if THE DEVELOPERS OF THE KASEZ have made any
EQUITY investments in any unit operating in the KASEZ

-No
If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the investee and the amount of
the investment

-N.A.

f) PIO to confirm If KASEZ has made any Loans/Advances in any unit in
any ANCILLARY SERVICES PROVIDER (BANK/CHA/LOGISTICS PROVIDER/
POWER PLANT/ETP ETC) operating in the KASEZ

-No
If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the investee and the amount of
the investment

-N.A

g) PIO to confirm if the Developers of the KASEZ have made any
Loans/Advances in any unit operating in the KASEZ.

-Information related to KASEZ authority.

If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the investee and the amount of
the investment

-N.A

                              23


        h) PIO to confirm if the Developers of KASEZ have made any
       Loans/Advances       in    any    ANCILLARY       SERVICE       PROVIDER
       (BANK/CHA/LOGISTICS PROVIDER/ POWER PLANT/ETP ETC) operating in
       the KASEZ

       -Information related to KASEZ authority.

       If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the investee and the amount of
       the investment

       -N.A"

Furthermore, the denial
 u/s 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act was also justified by the CPIO
stating that the information was sought to provide ITCHS tariff code of the
material, spare item, goods & services exported by each KASEZ Unit, which
were denied under 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of RTI Act,2005 since it relates to
commercial confidence, trade secrets or intellectual property and disclosure
of same would harm the competitive position of third party. However, it is
submitted that general description of authorised operation (viz.
Manufacture/trader/warehousing unit, details of manufacturing item etc) of
each KASEZ Units are already available on public domain on KASEZ website
under heading "List of working Unit". Further, revealing the technical detailed
information of each unit would harm their competitive position, hence they
were rejected under 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of RTI Act,2005 for being commercial
confidence, trade secrets or intellectual property. For example there are
many pharmaceutical units under KASEZ who are manufacturing medicines
and doing some research work on medicine including present pandemic
COVID-19.



In the endeavour to provide relief to the appellant, the Commission went
through each and every aspect raised by the appellant. However, after
perusing the replies of the CPIO, the FAA's order, subsequent replies of
different public authorities and the written explanations of the CPIO, the
Commission is satisfied to uphold the replies and submissions of the CPIO.
The appellant is also advised to avoid filing RTI applications by asking
information on multiple subjects in a single RTI application, filing RTI
application to a public authority when apparently the information pertains to a
different public authority and causing unnecessary pressure on the respondent
authority to reply.

The present appeals also fail to sustain as the Commission is not satisfied that
there is any larger public interest involved. However, the blunt allegations by

                                       24

 the appellant, point towards definite tendency unerringly towards the misuse
of the 
RTI Act
 by the appellant. These cases become a fit illustration for the
observation of the Apex Court in Aditya Bandhopadhyay's case that -

       "...The nation does not want a scenario where 75% of the staff of public
      authorities spends 75% of their time in collecting and furnishing
      information to applicants instead of discharging their regular duties...."

The Commission finds no merit in both the appeals and once again advises the
appellant to make judicious use of the cherished statute of the 
RTI Act
 in
future.



               The appeals are disposed of accordingly.



                                             Vanaja N. Sarna (वनजा एन. सरना)
                                      Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )




Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मा णत स या पत ित)


A.K. Assija (ऐ.के. असीजा)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011- 26182594 /
दनांक / Date





                                       25