[Cites 
18
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Samir Sardana vs Life Insurance Corporation Of India on 9 March, 2021


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                              के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                    Central Information Commission
                         बाबा गंगनाथ माग,मुिनरका
                     Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                     नई  द ली, New Delhi - 110067

िशकायत सं या / Complaint No. CIC/LICOI/C/2019/643989

Samir Sardana                                       ...िशकायतकता /Complainant
                                    VERSUS
                                     बनाम

CPIO                                                     ... ितवादी /Respondent
Life Insurance Corporation of
India, Mumbai

Relevant dates emerging from the complaint:

 RTI : 22-05-2019             FA     : 26-06-2019           Complaint: 27-06-2019

 CPIO : 17-06-2019            FAO : 25.07.2019              Hearing: 26-02-2021

                                   ORDER



1.    The complainant filed an application under the 
Right to Information Act,
2005
 
(RTI Act
) before the Central Public Information Officer (CPIO), Life
Insurance Corporation of India, Mumbai, seeking information on various points,
including, inter-alia:-

      (i)    PIO to confirm the investments wherein the LIC has Nominee
             Directors - name and amount, alongwith the names of the Nominees
             Directors of LIC of the said investment, as at March 31, 2019;

      (ii) PIO to provide the financial performance of the said investments (for
             each investment),as of March 31,2018;

      (iii) PIO to provide the number of meetings attended by each of the LIC
             Nominee Directors in each of the said infrastructure and social sector
             investments in the FY 2019 Discontinued Funds;

      (iv) PIO to provide the aggregate amount transferred by the LIC to the
             Discontinued Funds account in the last 7 years, year by year, etc.



                                                                         Page 1 of 8


 2.    Being aggrieved with the response given by the respondent, the
complainant filed a complaint u/
Section 18
 of the RTI Act before the Commission
requesting to take appropriate legal action against the CPIO u/
Section 20
 of the
RTI Act.



Hearing:

3.     The complainant attended the hearing through video-conferencing. The
respondent, Shri G S Wanwar, CPIO attended the hearing through video-
conferencing.

4.     The written submissions of the parties are taken on record.

5.     The complainant submitted that complete and correct information has not
been provided to him by the respondent public authority on his RTI application
dated 22.05.2019. The complainant stated that the respondent has wrongly denied
the information by invoking 
Section 8(1)(e)
, 
7(9)
, etc. of the 
RTI Act
. The
complainant stated that he is entitled to get complete information under the 
RTI
Act
. The complainant stated that the information sought by him is in larger public
interest and can be disclosed under the 
RTI Act
. The complainant reiterated that
complete information should be provided to him.

6.     The respondent submitted that vide their reply dated 17.06.2019, they have
informed the complainant that his RTI application is quite voluminous running
into several pages each containing several lengthy queries seeking information
on various diverse issues. Such RTI applications tend to disproportionately divert
the resources of the department and information on the same is denied under

Section 7(9)
 of RTI Act, 2005. Further, the information will have to be created
by 2048 branches of LIC spread all over India and then it will have to be collected
and collated and compiled by the Central Office merely to reply to the RTI
queries. Further, applicant has sought information in the form of
questions/assertions/opinions which does not constitute information within the
ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. The respondent further submitted that
the RTI application of the complainant contains more than 500 words but still
they have tried to provide the point-wise reply/information to the complainant on
his RTI application. The reply of the CPIO and FAA are seen during the hearing.



Decision:

7.     This Commission is not adjudicating on furnishing the information to the
complainant and therefore, the legal issue to be decided herein is whether there is
any malafide of the CPIO which attracts penal action u/
Section 20
 of the RTI Act,
2005. The complainant contested that there is a malafide intention on the part of
the respondent public authority in obstructing the information. On the other hand,

                                                                         Page 2 of 8

 the respondent contended that there was no malafide intention in denying the
information. The respondent submitted that they have informed the complainant
that his RTI application contains more than 500 words and as per 
Section 3
 of the
RTI Rules 2012 dated 31.07.2012 which states as "An application under sub-
section (1) of 
Section 6
 of the Act shall be accompanied by a fee of Rs. 10 and
shall ordinarily not contain more than five hundred words, excluding annexures,
containing address of the CPIO and that of the applicant: Provided that no
application shall be rejected only on the ground that it contains more than five
hundred words". The respondent stated that still they have tried to furnish point-
wise reply/information to the complainant on his RTI application and given
certain information to him.

8.     The Commission further observed that the complainant has filed a
complaint before the Commission under 
Section 18
 of the RTI Act and the
Commission, at this stage, cannot convert it as a second appeal and cannot direct
the respondent to provide information at the stage of adjudicating the complaint.
The Commission referred to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of 
Chief Information Commissioner and another Vs. State of Manipura
& Another
 reported in MANU/SC/1484/2011 : AIR 2012 SC 864; wherein their
Lordships have held that "the remedy for a person who had sought information
and was refused information, was to make an appeal under 
Section 19
 of the RTI
Act. Their Lordships have held that the nature of power under 
Section 18
 of the
Act is supervisory in character whereas the procedure under 
Section 19
 is an
appellate procedure and a person who is aggrieved by refusal in receiving the
information which he has sought for can only seek redressed in the manner
provided in the statute, namely, by following the procedure under 
Section 19
.

Section 7
 read with 
Section 19
 provides a complete statutory mechanism to a
person who is aggrieved by refusal to receive information. Such person has to get
the information by following the aforesaid statutory provisions. 
Sections 18
 and

19
 of the Act, serve two different purposes and lay down two different procedures
and provide two different remedies. One cannot be a substitute for the other.
While holding so, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has clarified the position that an
appeal under 
Section 18
 of the Act cannot be filed before the Chief Information
Officer. In the instant case, a complaint is filed under 
Section 18(1)
 of the Act. In
the light of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the complaint made by
the second respondent herein is not sustainable.


9.     The Commission, after examining the RTI application of the complainant,
has observed that some queries of the appellant are in the nature of seeking
explanation/opinion/advice from the CPIO on different subject-matters and the
queries are non-specific and general in nature. But the CPIO is not supposed to

                                                                           Page 3 of 8

 create information; or to interpret information; or or to furnish clarification to the
appellant under the ambit of the 
RTI Act
. As per 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, the
reasons/opinions/advices can only be provided to the applicants if it is available
on record of the public authority. The CPIO cannot create information in the
manner as sought by the appellant. The CPIO is only a communicator of
information based on the records held in the office and hence, he cannot expected
to do research work to deduce anything from the material therein and then supply
it to him.

10. The Commission further observed that the complainant has sought
voluminous information related to the functioning of the respondent public
authority. The information sought is voluminous in nature and may not be readily
available with the CPIO in the manner as sought by the appellant, collating and
compiling of which would disproportionately divert the resources of the
respondent organization. Hence, the disclosure of information is exempted as per

Section 7(9)
 of the RTI Act. The Commission finds it pertinent to bring to the
notice of the complainant that even though he in his RTI application had stated
that the matter is of vital importance and in Public Interest and should be in the
public domain. All this exercise on the part of the complainant, particularly
keeping in view the number of queries raised in every one of his RTI application
and counter submissions, negates the very purpose of 
RTI Act
. As much as a
CPIO has a statutory responsibility of complying with the provisions of the 
RTI
Act
, it is also expected of the RTI applicants to not transgress the spirit of 
RTI
Act
 by clogging the functioning of public authorities with such cumbersome and
implausible RTI applications. Providing a reply to the RTI applications is a duty
of the CPIO, not the only duty that has to be performed by the CPIOs. The
information sought by an applicant has to be balanced with the fact that the same
act should not cause drainage of limited resources and the manpower of any
authority, which will be unfair to them.

11. Moreover, the Commission referred to the decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India in 
Central Board of Secondary Education and Anr.
Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay and Ors
, SLP(C) NO. 7526/2009 wherein it was
held as under:


           "Indiscriminate and impractical demands or directions under 
RTI
           Act
 for disclosure of all and sundry information (unrelated to
           transparency and accountability in the functioning of public authorities
           and eradication of corruption) would be counter-productive as it will
           adversely affect the efficiency of the administration and result in the
           executive getting bogged down with the non-productive work of
           collecting and furnishing information. 
The Act
 should not be allowed

                                                                            Page 4 of 8

            to be misused or abused, to become a tool to obstruct the national
           development and integration, or to destroy the peace, tranquility and
           harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be converted into a tool of
           oppression or intimidation of honest officials striving to do their duty.
           The nation does not want a scenario where 75% of the staff of public
           authorities spends 75% of their time in collecting and furnishing
           information to applicants instead of discharging their regular duties.
           The threat of penalties under the 
RTI Act
 and the pressure of the
           authorities under the 
RTI Act
 should not lead to employees of public
           authorities prioritising 'information furnishing' at the cost of their
           normal and regular duties."

Furthermore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of ICAI vs. Shaunak H.
Satya (2011) 8 SCC 781 dated 02.09.2011 had held as under:

           "26. We however agree that it is necessary to make a distinction in
           regard to information intended to bring transparency, to improve
           accountability and to reduce corruption, falling under 
Section 4(1)(b)

           and (c) and other information which may not have a bearing on
           accountability or reducing corruption. The competent authorities under
           the 
RTI Act
 will have to maintain a proper balance so that while
           achieving transparency, the demand for information does not reach
           unmanageable proportions affecting other public interests, which
           include efficient operation of public authorities and government,
           preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information and optimum
           use of limited fiscal resources"

12. The Commission further observed that the respondent in this case, has
made every possible effort to provide replies and available information to the
complainant and hence, the Commission does find any scope for interference in
the matter. Further, no malafide was observed on the part of the respondent public
authority in denying/obstructing the information. The Commission further
observed that the FAA in one of the query has responded to the complainant to
refer to the Annual Report which is available on their website but the respondent
public authority has not given specific web-link and page number where the
complainant can access the information. In view of this, the Commission advised
the respondent that if any information is available in public domain then specific
web-link in this regard should be provided to the RTI applicants for their ease.
Further, if any information is available in compiled form then the same should
also be provided to the RTI applicants without disclosing the information of
commercial confidence and personal information.



                                                                          Page 5 of 8


 
13. With respect to imposition of penalty on the CPIO, therefore, with regard
to the situations governing imposition of penalty on the CPIO under 
Section 20

of the RTI Act, 2005, this Commission refers to the decision dated 01.06.2012 of
the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in W.P.(C) 11271/2009 titled as 
Registrar of
Companies &Ors v. Dharmendra Kumar Garg&Anr.
, wherein, it was held as
under:-


       "61. Even if it were to be assumed for the sake of argument, that the
       view taken by the learned Central Information Commissioner Page 3
       of 4 in the impugned order was correct, and that the PIOs were
       obliged to provide the information, which was otherwise retrievable
       by the querist by resort to 
Section 610
 of the Companies Act, it could
       not be said that the information had been withheld malafide or
       deliberately without any reasonable cause. It can happen that the PIO
       may genuinely and bonafidely entertain the belief and hold the view
       that the information sought by the querist cannot be provided for one
       or the other reasons. Merely because the CIC eventually finds that the
       view taken by the PIO was not correct, it cannot automatically lead
       to issuance of a show cause notice under 
Section 20
 of the RTI Act
       and the imposition of penalty. The legislature has cautiously provided
       that only in cases of malafides or unreasonable conduct, i.e., where
       the PIO, without reasonable cause refuses to receive the application,
       or provide the information, or knowingly gives incorrect, incomplete
       or misleading information or destroys the information, that the
       personal penalty on the PIO can be imposed. This was certainly not
       one such case. If the CIC starts imposing penalty on the PIOs in every
       other case, without any justification, it would instill a sense of
       constant apprehension in those functioning as PIOs in the public
       authorities, and would put undue pressure on them. They would not
       be able to fulfill their statutory duties under the 
RTI Act
 with an
       independent mind and with objectivity. Such consequences would not
       auger well for the future development and growth of the regime that
       the 
RTI Act
 seeks to bring in, and may lead to skewed and imbalanced
       decisions by the PIOs Appellate Authorities and the CIC. It may even
       lead to unreasonable and absurd orders and bring the institutions
       created by the 
RTI Act
 in disrepute."

Similarly, the following observations of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in

Bhagat Singh v. CIC &Ors., WP(C
) 3114/2007 are pertinent in this matter:-


       "17. This Court takes a serious note of the two year delay in
       releasing information, the lack of adequate reasoning in the orders

                                                                       Page 6 of 8

          of the Public Information Officer and the Appellate Authority and
         the lack of application of mind in relation to the nature of
         information sought. The materials on record clearly show the
         lackadaisical approach of the second and third respondent in
         releasing the information sought. However, the Petitioner has not
         been able to demonstrate that they malafidely denied the information
         sought. Therefore, a direction to theCentral Information
         Commission to initiate action under 
Section 20
 of the Act, cannot be
         issued."

 
Furthermore, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the decision of Col. 
Rajendra
 Singh v. Central Information Commission and Anr., WP (C
) 5469 of 2008
 dated 20-03-2009 has held as under:-


         "
Section 20
, no doubt empowers the CIC to take penal action and
         direct payment of such compensation or penalty as is warranted.
         Yet the Commission has to be satisfied that the delay occurred was
         without reasonable cause or the request was denied malafidely.
          ...The preceding discussion shows that at least in the opinion of
         this Court, there are no allegations to establish that the information
         was withheld malafide or unduly delayed so as to lead to an
         inference that petitioner was responsible for unreasonably
         withholding it."

14.      In light of the factual matrix of the complaint and the legal
principles enunciated in the aforementioned case-laws, this Commission
comes to the conclusion that there is no malafide denial of information. In
view of this, no action under 
Section 20
 of the RTI Act, 2005 is warranted
in this case.

15.      With the above observations, the complaint is disposed of.

16.      Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.




                                                          नीरज कु मार गु ा)
                                      Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरज           ा
                                                              सूचना आयु )
                                    Information Commissioner (सू

                                                     िदनां क / Date: 26-02-2021
 Authenticated true copy
 (अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)

 S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा),
 Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),(011-26105682)


                                                                      Page 7 of 8

 Addresses of the parties:
1.    CPIO
      Life Insurance Corporation of India
      Central Office, 5th Floor, West Wing
      Yogakshema, Jeevan Bima Marg
      PB. No. 19953, Mumbai-400021

2.    Samir Sardana





                                             Page 8 of 8