[Cites 
11
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Mo. Hasim vs All India Institute Of Medical Sciences on 10 January, 2020


                                        के ीय सूचना आयोग
                              Central Information Commission
                                    बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                               Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                                 नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या / Second Appeal No.:- CIC/AIIMS/A/2018/138493-BJ

Md. Hasim
                                                                         ....अपीलकता/Appellant
                                           VERSUS
                                              बनाम
CPIO
All India Institute of Medical Sciences
Virbhadra Road, Rishikesh - 249203
                                                                   ... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing       :                     09.01.2020
Date of Decision      :                     10.01.2020

Date of RTI application                                                     19.03.2018
CPIO's response                                                             09.04.2018
Date of the First Appeal                                                    14.04.2018
First Appellate Authority's response                                        Not on Record
Date of diarised receipt of Appeal by the Commission                        18.06.2018

                                          ORDER

FACTS:

The Appellant vide his RTI application sought information on 04 points with regard to the total
number and complete details of the number of outsourced companies engaged at AIIMS,
Rishikesh at the time, the number and complete details of appointments made by such companies
in the financial years 2015-16, 2016-17, and 2017-18 and the basis of such appointments, the
certified copies of the details, the certified copies of the basis of selection of candidates for
appointment, and other related issues thereto.



The CPIO, vide its letter dated 09.04.2018, provided a point-wise reply to the Appellant and
stated that the information sought under point no. 3 was not maintained by the institution and
that the information in point no. 4 pertained to unending information and hence could not be
answered. Dissatisfied with the response of the CPIO, the Appellant approached the FAA. The
order of the FAA, if any, is not on record of the Commission.



HEARING:

                                                                                      Page 1 of 5


 Facts emerging during the hearing:

The following were present:

Appellant: Absent;

Respondent:      Mr. Harish Thapliyal,        CPIO     &   Public   Relation   Protocol   Officer
through VC;



The Appellant remained absent during the hearing. Mr. Rakesh, Network Engineer NIC studio at
Nainital confirmed the absence of the Appellant. In its reply, the Respondent reiterated the
response of the CPIO and informed the Commission that the First Appeal was also answered on
22.06.2018 wherein the Appellant was offered inspection of the documents, if so desired.



The Commission referred to the definition of information
 u/s 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 which is
reproduced below:

       "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-
       mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, report,
       papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and information
       relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other
       law for the time being in force."

Furthermore, a reference can also be made to the relevant extract of 
Section 2 (j)
 of the RTI Act,
2005 which reads as under:

       "(j) right to information" means the right to information accessible under this Act which
       is held by or under the control of any public authority and includes ........"

In this context a reference was made to the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in 2011 (8) SCC
497 (
CBSE Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay
), wherein it was held as under:


       35..... "It is also not required to provide 'advice' or 'opinion' to an applicant, nor
       required to obtain and furnish any 'opinion' or 'advice' to an applicant. The reference to
       'opinion' or 'advice' in the definition of 'information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only
       refers to such material available in the records of the public authority. Many public
       authorities have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and opinion to
       the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused with any obligation
       under the 
RTI Act
."

Furthermore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Khanapuram Gandaiah Vs. Administrative
Officer and Ors. Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.34868 OF 2009 (Decided on January 4, 2010)
had held as under:

       6. "....
Under the RTI Act
 "information" is defined under 
Section 2(f)
 which provides:

       "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-
       mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, report,
       papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and information
       relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other
       law for the time being in force."

       This definition shows that an applicant under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act can get any
       information which is already in existence and accessible to the public authority under

                                                                                       Page 2 of 5

        law. Of course, under the 
RTI Act
 an applicant is entitled to get copy of the opinions,
       advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he cannot ask for any information as to why such
       opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc. have been passed."

       7. "....the Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material which is not
       before him; or any information he could have obtained under law. Under 
Section 6
 of
       the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such information which can be accessed
       by the "public authority" under any other law for the time being in force. The answers
       sought by the petitioner in the application could not have been with the public authority
       nor could he have had access to this information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged
       to give any reasons as to why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was
       before him."

The Commission observed that a voluntary disclosure of all information that ought to be
displayed in the public domain should be the rule and members of public who having to
seek information should be an exception. An open government, which is the cherished objective
of the 
RTI Act
, can be realised only if all public offices comply with proactive disclosure norms.

Section 4(2)
 of the RTI Act mandates every public authority to provide as much information suo-
motu to the public at regular intervals through various means of communications, including the
Internet, so that the public need not resort to the use of 
RTI Act
.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of 
CBSE and Anr. Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay
and Ors
 2011 (8) SCC 497 held as under:


       "37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and right to information
       are intended to be formidable tools in the hands of responsible citizens to fight corruption
       and to bring in transparency and accountability. The provisions of 
RTI Act
 should be
       enforced strictly and all efforts should be made to bring to light the necessary
       information under Clause (b) of 
Section 4(1)
 of the Act which relates to securing
       transparency and accountability in the working of public authorities and in discouraging
       corruption."

The Commission also observes the Hon'ble Delhi High Court ruling in WP (C) 12714/2009
Delhi Development Authority v. Central Information Commission and Another (delivered on:

21.05.2010), wherein it was held as under:

       "16.It also provides that the information should be easily accessible and to the extent possible
       should be in electronic format with the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public
       Information Officer, as the case may be. The word disseminate has also been defined in the
       explanation to mean - making the information known or communicating the information to the
       public through notice boards, newspapers, public announcements, media broadcasts, the internet,
       etc. It is, therefore, clear from a plain reading of 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act that the information,
       which a public authority is obliged to publish under the said section should be made available to
       the public and specifically through the internet. There is no denying that the petitioner is duty
       bound by virtue of the provisions of 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act to publish the information indicated
       in 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and 
4(1)(c)
 on its website so that the public have minimum resort to the use of
       the 
RTI Act
 to obtain the information."



Furthermore, High Court of Delhi in the decision of 
General Manager Finance Air India Ltd &
Anr v. Virender Singh, LPA No.
 205/2012, Decided On: 16.07.2012 had held as under:




                                                                                              Page 3 of 5


        "8. 
The RTI Act
, as per its preamble was enacted to enable the citizens to secure access
       to information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency
       and accountability in the working of every public authority. An informed citizenry and
       transparency of information have been spelled out as vital to democracy and to contain
       corruption and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities accountable to the
       governed. The said legislation is undoubtedly one of the most significant enactments of
       independent India and a landmark in governance. The spirit of the legislation is further
       evident from various provisions thereof which require public authorities to:

       A. Publish inter alia:

       i) the procedure followed in the decision making process;

       ii) the norms for the discharge of its functions;

       iii) rules, regulations, instructions manuals and records used by its employees in
       discharging of its functions;

       iv) the manner and execution of subsidy programmes including the amounts allocated
       and the details of beneficiaries of such programmes;

       v) the particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or authorizations granted. [see
       
Section 4(1) (b)
, (iii), (iv), (v); (xii) & (xiii)].

       B. Suo moto provide to the public at regular intervals as much information as possible
       [see 
Section 4(2)
]."

The Appellant was not present to contest the submissions of the Respondent or to substantiate his
claims further.



DECISION:



Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by the Respondent, the
Commission directs the Respondent Public Authority to suo moto disclose all the details
regarding the contract entered into with the outsourced companies and the details thereof on its
website for perusal by public at large.



The Appeal stands disposed accordingly.



                                                                    (Bimal Julka) (िबमल जु का)
                                                      (Information Commissioner) (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत त)



(K.L. Das) (के .एल.दास)
(Dy. Registrar) (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26182598/ 
[email protected]

 दनांक / Date: 10.01.2020

                                                                                      Page 4 of 5

 Copy to:



   1. The Director, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Virbhadra Road, Rishikesh -

      249203





                                                                              Page 5 of 5