[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Nipun Singhvi vs State Bank Of India on 5 September, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                              के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                           बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                         नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/MOFIN/A/2022/608511/SBIND

Nipun Singhvi                                           ......अपीलकता /Appellant

                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम
CPIO,
State Bank of India, Compliance
Department RTI Cell 3rd Floor
Corporate Centre, State Bank Bhavan
Madam Kamaroad, Nariman
Point, Mumbai-400021                                  .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                   :   17/07/2023
Date of Decision                  :   30/08/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on          :   20/10/2021
CPIO replied on                   :   22/10/2021
First appeal filed on             :   16/11/2021
First Appellate Authority order   :   03/12/2021
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated        :   04/02/2022

Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 20.10.2021 seeking the following
information:



                                        1


       "Please provide the copy of order passed against SBI imposing penalty of Rs.1
      Crore as per press release numbered 2021-2022/1060 dated 18.10.2021."



The CPIO furnished a reply to the Appellant on 22.10.2021 stating as under:



      "The information sought under 
RTI Act, 2005
 comes under the restricted list
      of information disclosure under 
RTI Act
 
Section 8 (1) (a)
 of the act."



Being dissatisfied, the Appellant filed a First Appeal dated 16.11.2021. FAA's order,
dated 03.12.2021, upheld the reply of the CPIO and stated inter alia as under:



       "Thus, any supply of information, which is more than what has already been
provided by RBI by way of the RBI Press Release, holds no relationship to any public
activity or interest and also would cause unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the
Bank -- The same would hence be exempted under 
Section 8(1) (i)
.C. The
undersigned, therefore, concurs with the decision of the SBI CPIO & DGM
(Regulatory Coordination) and while upholding the decision of CPIO, would like to
add that the PO is exempted from disclosure under 
Sections 8 (1)(d)
, 
Sections 8 (1)(e)

and 
Sections 8 (1)(j)
 in addition to 
Section 8 (1)(a)
 of the RTI Act 2005."



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Appellant approached the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Represented by Mayur Jaktawat, Advocate through video-conference.
Respondent: S Dinesh, DGM & CPIO present through video-conference.



The Rep. of the Appellant reiterated the contents of written submissions filed on
15.07.2023 stating as under:



"If such information is not disclosed to general public, it will lead to three major
problems;

➢ The transactions will get affected and the banks may take undue advantage of
the same.

➢ The general public may end up making wrong choices due to lack of information.
➢ The general public is liable to know the economic crisis and credit worthiness of
the banking sector as public money is involved at large.
C. BREACH OF NATURAL JUSTICE PRINCIPLES

                                          2

 ➢ The CPIO has not even given the opportunity of being heard which is very basic
principle of natural justice that one must get the chance of being heard.
➢ Further there are no speaking orders or reasoned order in support of the
response of CPIO. If no reasons are given in the orders, then it is breach of natural
justice principals since it is quasi judicial obligation to give reasons for order,
because the party effected must know on what grounds the order passed against
him.

D. REPLY IS AGAINST THE PROVISIONS OF RTI ACT, 2005
The reply which has been given by the CPIO against the queries raised by me is not
in consonance with the provisions of 
RTI Act, 2005
 that there is violation under

section 7(8)(i)
 and 
sec. 20
 of the RTI Act, 2005.

7. It is submitted in that in response to said First Appeal, the response given by FAA
is that it upholded the response of the CPIO and that the relevant penalty order is
exempted from disclosure under 
section 8(1)(d)
,
Section 8 (1)(e)
 and 
section 8(1)(j)

in addition to 
section 8(1)(a)
 of the RTI Act 2005.



xxx


 
10. It is submitted that in the matter of 
Reserve Bank of India Vs Jyantilal N.
Mistry (Transferred Case (Civil) No.
 91 Of 2015 (Arising out of Transfer Petition
(Civil) No. 707 of 2012) in the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the main issue that arose for
consideration was "whether all the information sought for under 
RTI Act
 can be
denied by RBI and other Banks on the grounds of economic interest, commercial
confidence ,fiduciary relationship with other Bank on the one hand and the public
interest on the other. If the answer of the above question is in negative, then up to
what extent the information can be provided under the 2005 Act?"


        11. It is submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter stated that
while introducing Right to information Bill ,2004 a serious discussion and debate
had taken place.The then Prime Minister while addressing the House informed that
the RTI Bill is to provide for setting out practical regime of right to information for
people, to secure access to information under the public authorities in order to
promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority.



xxx


       13.It is submitted that as per the quoted Judgment it has been specifically
mentioned by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the exemptions provided under

Section 8
 are not absolute .Further the Banks must uphold public interest and not
the interest of the individual bank. The Hon'ble court also pointed out that the RBI
is not in fiduciary relation with other banks. And the RBI ought to act with

                                          3

 transparency and not hide information that might embarrass individual banks.
Further the Hon'ble Court pointed that the Bank's argument that the disclosure
would hurt economic interest of the country was totally misconceived and that that
the RBI and the Banks had sidestepped the public's demand to give information on
the pretext of "Fiduciary relationship and Economic interest. Arguments of the
Bank that if people who are sovereign ,are made aware of irregularities committed
by the banks then the country's economic security will be endangered is also
baseless .Further Court pointed out that national interest can't be seen with the
glasses devoid of economic interest.

        14. Hence as per the above Judgment in the present matter also the response
of the FAA about non-disclosure of PO in the pretext of Economic interest and
Fiduciary relationship is baseless Further as per above Judgment the Banks must
uphold public interest rather then interest of individual bank. Hence as has been
stated in the above Judgment national interest i.e interest of public at large has to
be taken care of and the public is supposed to be disclosed of the information which
if is hided is going to bring harm to them."



The Respondent also reiterated the contents of their written submissions dated
13.07.2023 stating as under


       "It is respectfully submitted that we deny all the statements, allegations,
claims, and contentions made / leveled / raised in the Appeal submitted by the
Appellant, unless specifically admitted hereunder. It is further submitted that the
CPIO and the First Appellate Authority had declined the information sought by the
Appellant under the provisions of 
Sections 8(1)(a)
, (d), (e) and (j) of the 
RTI Act
. 3.
The following was the Information sought by the Applicant by his RTI application
dated: 20/10/2021: Please provide the copy of order passed by RBI imposing
monetary penalty of Rs. 1 Crore by RBI as per RBI press release numbered 2021-
2022/1060 (Document/Information/PO").

       4. Brief Background:

       A. In October 2010, several applicants sought copies of RAR's of various banks
including that of the bank under the Act. The RAR's sought by the concerned RTI
applicants are prepared by RBI pursuant to inspection/scrutiny conducted by its
officers, under 
Section 35
 of the Banking Regulation Act 1949, annually. The said
annual inspection reports, also called RARS, contain comprehensive review of the
performance/operational frailties/ functioning of the banks by RBI in exercise of its
supervisory and regulatory powers. The RAR's contain wide-ranging information,
including business plans of the banks to customer details and legal compliance, it
also contains requirement, if any, of regulatory intervention and risk assessment of
various credit risks of the bank in question, by RBI. Such inspection reports are not

                                          4

 only irrelevant to the public at large, but also the information contained thereto
price sensitive and confidential. As a result, the information requests under the Act
were -- denied by RBI on the grounds of economic interest, commercial confidence,
fiduciary relationship, and public interest (under applicable exemptions provisions
of the Act).

Several applicants filed appeals before the Chief Information Commission inter alia
challenging the denial of the disclosure of the RARS by RBI.

 
B Findings of the Apex Court: The issue was finally decided by the Hon'ble
Apex court on 16.12.2015 in a Transfer Petition (91/2015) titled as 
Reserve Bank of
India vs. Jayantilal N. Mistry
 case, (2016) 3 SCC 525 (Mistry Case/Judgment'). The
findings of the learned Court were broadly made on two aspects of the Act and have
been recorded as under-


 
Fiduciary relationship [Concerns 
Section 8(1)(e)
 of the Act]
       Economic interests [Concerns 
Section 8(1) (a)
 of the Act]
       C. Contempt Petitions before the Hon'ble Apex Court: Thereafter, one Mr.
Girish Mittal, filed a Contempt Petition being Contempt Petition No. (C) No.928 of
2016 against RBI and before the Hon'ble Apex Court inter alia alleging that RBI have
withheld certain information in spite of the directions of the Hon'ble Apex Court in
the Mistry Judgment and therefore they have committed contempt of the
judgement of the Hon'ble Apex Court. Further, another Contempt Petition i.c.,
Contempt Petition (C) No.59 of 2017 was filed against RBI inter alia alleging that
RBI had uploaded a Disclosure Policy dated 30.11.2016 on its website by which the
Public Information Officers were directed not to disclose virtually all kinds of
information, which were in violation of the judgment in 
Jayantilal N. Mistry
 case.
 
As
a result, on 26.04.2019, the Hon'ble Apex Court passed the judgment in 
Girish Mittal
v. Paravati V. Sundaram
, 2019 SCC OnLine SC 607 ("Girish Mittal Case/Judgment")
wherein it was inter alia held that RBI had committed contempt of the Court by
exempting disclosure of information as directed in 
Jayantilal N. Mistry
 case, in its
disclosure policy dated 18.06.2018. Importantly, the Hon'ble Apex Court also stated:
"We are not persuaded to accept the submission of Mr. Gupta that the judgment
dated 16.12.2015 requires reconsideration as we cannot consider the said
submission while deciding the contempt petitions."


 
D. Subsequently, the RBI addressed a letter dated 26.06.2019 to SBI post
facto, informing that in compliance of the Judgment in 
Girish Mittal
 case, it has
issued inspection reports of SBI for the years 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, which were
clearly sought under prior application(s). The said letter did not indicate any details
regarding the application made under the Act, the stage of the proceedings in
respect of such RTI application, etc. In fact, by disclosing such inspection reports.
RBI subverted circumvented the due process under the 
RTI Act
, since the issuance


                                          5

 would imply that the various proceedings pending under the Act whereby SBI had
challenged disclosure of such inspection reports, would be rendered infructuous.


       E. On 02/09/2019, a Writ Petition, being WP. (Civil) No. 1159 of 2019 was
filed in the Hon'ble Supreme Court, inter alia by a few private Banks praying for
striking down of arbitrary actions of RBI disclosing in their Inspection Reports/RARS
by RBI, and for declaration that the sensitive and confidential information received
by RBI during its inspections and regulatory & related functions pertaining to Banks
are exempted from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)
 of the Act".



Decision:

During the pendency of the decision in the matter, it has been noted from the
documents filed on record that the instant appeal was ab initio not maintainable
as the Appellant filed the instant Second Appeal based on a RTI Application filed
with RBI vide RBIND/R/E/21/08671 while the CPIO's reply is with respect to RTI
reference no. SBIND/R/E/21/01804 filed with SBI. Pertinently so, this fact was
pointed out by the FAA as well at paras 3 & 4 of the preface to the order, yet the
FAA proceeded with deciding on the reply of CPIO, SBI without taking the RTI
Application reference no. SBIND/R/E/21/01804 filed with SBI on record which
renders the FAA's order technically flawed.



Nonetheless, taking a liberal view in the matter considering the fact that the above
observation was not pertinent at the time of the hearing and having heard the case
at length on merits, the following decision is being issued:



In the facts of the instant case, it is pertinent to note that a decision of a coordinate
bench of the Commission in the matter of various third-party banks vs. RBI vide File
No. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 covers a detailed
discussion inter alia on the same nature of information sought for from the RBI and
the reliance placed by RBI on the 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case. Suffice to say that the issues
raised in the instant case are encapsulated in that same discussion of the
coordinate bench in the following manner:




 
"39. A comprehensive view has to be taken on the objection filed by the
institutions. These objectives has to be deliberated and adjudicated in the light of

Jayantilal Mistry
's case and other judicial pronouncements relevant in such matter,
some of which have been referred by the Commission in the above parts as well.


The Commission while examining various objections realize that the Writ Petitions
filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is seeking directions of the Supreme
Court for non-disclosure of certain aspects of these audit/inspection report and any
such guidance in these Writ Petitions will have direct bearing and provide further

                                           6

 clarity to the CPIO/FAA in adjudicating various aspects of disclosure/non-disclosure
of reports or the information/data which are part of these reports under the
provisions of the 
RTI Act
. The Commission takes note that all the cases/second
appeals filed herein are based on interpretations of RBI Vs. Jayantilal Mistry case
and other relevant judicial pronouncements requesting for full disclosure vis-à-vis
with exemptions under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act for non-disclosure of full or parts
of these reports.

 
40. In view of the above observations, the Commission is of the view that the
reports generated in the hands of regulatory public authority in discharge of its
statutory obligations are information under 
Section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act, as the
regulator and the regulated entities are not governed by fiduciary relationship. The
orders of the Commission to their effect has been upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case and the position is unchanged even today. Various
objections filed by banks/financial institutions, to be examined, analyzed and
adjudicated upon, are related to various data and information submitted to the
Reserve Bank of India by these financial institutions explaining their operations,
commercial decisions, clients data etc. under statutory obligations can be disclosed
as such. There are apparently two set of such information which have been shared
by the institutions with the regulator under statutory obligation. First is the
information/data of clients relating to their business/commercial operations,
financial transactions, business and commercial strategy which is shared by clients
with financial institutions in full trust and confidence and is held by them in fiduciary
capacity, protected from disclosure under the 
RTI Act
 in their hands. Second set is
the information relating to business strategy, decisions, transactions, other
operational data etc. of financial institutions have been bearing on their
competitive position which also enjoys the exemption from disclosure in their hands,
if it is a public authority or otherwise, under the 
RTI Act
. Some of such data, on case
to case basis be sensitive enough for protection of national interest. The
Commission is of the view that the protection of disclosure of information under

Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of financial institutions does not
evaporate once such data/information is shared, in good faith and trust, with the
regulator under statutory obligation.
 
Various observations of Hon'ble Supreme
Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case also does not indicate so and decision of the
regulator to consider redacting such data/information while disclosing the reports
is aligned with this and other judicial pronouncements of Supreme Court and High
Courts.


 
41. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of the
CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care has
to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making reasoned
order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and later in the hands

                                           7

 of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be required to adjudicate
such RTI applications in the light of the observations of the Commission afresh. The
Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various objections filed by
the Banks and Financial Institutions and submissions made by applicant to reach
the decision in favour or against redaction of various parts of the report on case to
case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal
Mistry
 case and other relevant judgments, some of which have been referred in this
order as well. Hence, with these observations the orders passed by the CPIO and
FAA in these matters are set aside and the cases are being remanded to the CPIO
for adjudication afresh. (Emphasis Supplied)


       42. It is amply clear that Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and
others tagged are admitted in Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein guidance and
direction has been sought on non-disclosure of certain type of information which
are essentially the part of the Annual Inspection Report/RAR, etc. These petitions
also seek protection of interim communication between regulator and the
regulated entity in the process of finalization of these reports or otherwise. It is
obvious that decision in these Writ Petitions will provide clarity and guidance to the
Public Authority on redaction/non-disclosure of a set of information inspite of being
part of these reports which are open to disclosure. At this stage, any decision by the
Public Authority will amount to pre-judging the issues pending admitted Writ
Petitions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Various banks, financial institutions,
respondent public authority and the RTI applicant have already impleaded party
and are presenting their arguments before the Apex Court.

       43. Hence, any decision of redaction or disclosure of information, without
waiting for decision in the Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged may cause irrevocable damage against right of privacy and protection of
commercial interest. Hence, the respondent public authority if expedient may wait
for the outcome in Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others tagged
or seek clarification from the Hon'ble Court and accordingly decide these RTI
applications by following process as enumerated in the earlier paras by the
Commission in the interest of principles of natural justice. While disclosing the
information they should be cautious in taking a considerate view balancing right to
privacy, protection of national and commercial interest on one hand vis-à-vis larger
public interest. (Emphasis Supplied)

 
44. It is further observed that similar view has also been taken by the Division
Bench of the Commission in file bearing nos. CIC/VS/A/2013/001488 and
CIC/VS/A/2013/001805 dated 11.05.2017 wherein the Commission observed that
'Having considered the submissions of both the parties, the Commission observes
that since a similar issue is pending adjudication before the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in the matter of Central for 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban

                                          8

 Development Corporation Ltd. &Ors.
, it would be judicious to await the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court. However, on receipt of the final outcome
from the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter, the appellant shall be at liberty to
file second appeal afresh, if he so desires. The instant appeals are disposed of'."




Now, irrespective of the above stated position, it is also noteworthy that the
averred Press Release refers to the scrutiny of a particular customer account
maintained with the Bank, and notice issued to the Respondent Bank in relation to
a certain delay in reporting of a bank fraud and a reply received from the bank in
that regard, all of which suggests the privacy stake of a third party customer of the
bank and the fiduciary relationship held between the bank and that third party
customer. Therefore, the stance of the Respondent bank stating that the
information that entailed public interest has already been placed in the public
domain appears to bear sufficient merit.



In view of the foregoing discussion, the Commission is not inclined to order for any
relief in the matter.



                      The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                    Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                           हािन)
                                          Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                         9