[Cites 
16
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Nitin Kevalchand Bhandari vs Reserve Bank Of India on 7 July, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                 के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                          Central Information Commission
                              बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                           Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                            नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/RBIND/A/2022/113901

NITIN KEVALCHAND BHANDARI
(Ahmednagar Merchants Co-Op Bank Ltd.)                       ......अपीलकता /Appellant

                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम
CPIO,
Reserve Bank of India, Department
of Regulation, Central Office, RTI Cell,
Central Office Building, 12th/13th
Floor, Shahid Bhagat Singh Marg,
Fort, Mumbai-400001, Maharashtra.                          .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                     :   23/06/2023
Date of Decision                    :   06/07/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :                 Saroj Punhani

(Note: The instant appeal has been filed by the third party i.e. Ahmednagar
Merchant's Co-op Bank Ltd. aggrieved by an order passed by the FAA, RBI).

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on            :   12/08/2021
CPIO replied on                     :   24/09/2021 & 04/10/2021
First appeal filed on               :   01/11/2021
First Appellate Authority order     :   10/12/2021
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated          :   15/03/2022

Information sought
:

                                             1


 The RTI applicant Shri Rajendra Kantilal Chopada filed an RTI application dated
12.08.2021 seeking the following information:



1) The copy of complaints received against renewal / extension of Mr. Suresh
Hiralal Katariya a Chief Executive Officer of Ahmednagar Merchant' Co-op Bank
Ltd., Ahmednagar in contravention of fit and proper Criteria determined by RBI.



2) The copy of show cause notice issued by RBI to Ahmednagar Merchant's Co-op
Bank Ltd. Ahmednagar in reference to complaints filed by members of the bank.



3) The copy of reply/explanation submitted by Ahmednagar Merchant's Co-op
Bank Ltd. Ahmednagar to RBI.



4) Copies of email and other correspondence between RBI and Ahmednagar
Merchant's Co-op Bank Ltd., Ahmednagar in respect with extension of Mr. Suresh
Hiralal Katariya as Chief Executive Officer of Ahmednagar Merchant's Co-op Bank
Ltd. Ahmednagar


5) The copy of final order issued by RBI in respect with extension of Mr. Suresh
Hiralal Katariya as Chief Executive Officer of Ahmednagar Merchant's Co-op Bank
Ltd., Ahmednagar."



The CPIO vide its letter dated 24.09.2021 had sent a notice
 u/s. 11(1)
 of the RTI
Act to the Appellant bank i.e. Ahmednagar Merchant's Co-op Bank Ltd. stating as
under:



       "At the outset, it is stated that applicant has suppressed the material facts
from this Hon'ble authority that he is member of the bank and as our bank is co-
operative society registered under 
Maharashtra Co-Operative Societies Act
 and is
carrying on banking business, the rights of member are governed by section 32 of
the said Act. The provisions of provisions section 32 (1) of Maharashtra Co-
operative 
Societies Act
 are as follows:



      32 (1) Every member of a society shall be entitled to inspect, free of cost, at
      the society's office during office hours, or any time fixed for them. purpose
      by the society, a copy of the Act, the rules and the bye-laws, the last audited
      annual balance sheet, the profit and loss account, a list of the members of
      the committee, a register of members, the minutes of general meetings,
      minutes of committee meetings and those portions of the books and records
      in which his transactions with the society have been recorded. Hence, we

                                         2

       submit that information sought by him is not covered by the provisions of
      section 32 of the said Act.



2) We further submit that information sought by him including copy of complaint
received against renewal / extension of Mr. Suresh Hiralal Katariya as chief
executive office of the bank and the copies of documents referred in the said letter
are confidential documents and confidential information relating appointment of
CEO of the bank. In this connection, your Honour's attention is invited to the
provisions of sub section (d) of 
Section 8
 of Right to Information Act which is as
follows:



      8 (d) - "information including commercial confidence, trade secrets or
      intellectual property, the disclosure of which would harm the competitive
      position of a third party, unless the competent authority as satisfied that
      larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such information".



3) We further submit that no public interest is involved in the matter. We also
submit that if information sought for along with copies of documents are provided
to the applicant, it is likely to be used by him with a view to harass the bank.



4) It may further be noted that in his application dated 12/8/2021 applicant has
not mentioned as to for what purpose he wants said information. It may further
be noted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the ruling reported in AIR 2013 SC
(Stipp) 437 in the matter of 
Thalappalam Service Co-op Bank Ltd. & ors v. State of
Kerala & Ors.
 has held that cooperative societies which are fonned under state co-
operative societies, are not State and therefore 
Right to Information Act
 is not
applicable to the co-operative societies. Considering this aspect, it is submitted
that we have strong objection for supplying information / copies of documents
sought for by the applicant.




We therefore request that application given by the applicant for calling
information / copies of documents under 
Right to Information Act
 2005 is given
with malafide intention which may please be rejected."



The CPIO vide its letter dated 04.10.2021 had sent a notice
 u/s. 11(3)
 of the RTI
Act to the Appellant bank i.e. Ahmednagar Merchant's Co-op Bank Ltd. stating as
under:



      "After considering your response (vide your letter Ref. No. HO/8945/2021-
22 dated September 24, 2021) to the above notice, it has been decided to disclose

                                         3

 information (details of which are given in our abovementioned letter dated
September 16, 2021) after severing personal information under 
Section 8 (1) (g)

and 
Section 8 (1) (j)
 of RTI Act, 2005. Hence a Notice under 
Section 11(3)
 of the RTI
Act 2005 is hereby being served apprising you of the decision taken in the matter.



      If you desire to prefer an appeal against this decision, the same may be
preferred within 30 days to the First Appellate Authority in Reserve Bank of India,
Shri Radha Shyam Ratho, Executive Director, Department of Regulation, Shahid
Bhagat Singh Marg, Fort, Mumbai - 400001. In case any such appeal is preferred
by you within the stipulated period, the same may be communicated to CP10,
DOR, RBI."



Being dissatisfied, the Appellant Bank through its authorized representative filed
First Appeal dated 01.11.2021. FAA's order, dated 10.12.2021, upheld the reply of
the CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Appellant bank approached the
Commission with the instant Second Appeal.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Shri Anand, Advocate representative of the Appellant bank present
through Video-Conference.

Respondent: Shri Bhupendra Singh Kasva, Manager and Ms. Jeet Pathak, ALA
present through Video-Conference.

RTI applicant: Present through Video-Conference.



The written submissions of the Appellant bank and the Respondent are taken on
record.



The Representative of the Appellant Bank, during the hearing, reiterated the
contents of their written submissions, which states as under:
"The Applicant is a member of the bank and Section 32 of the Maharashtra Co.
Op. Societies Act, deals with the rights of members to seek information, copies etc.
The information sought by the Applicant is not covered by the provisions of 
Section
32
 of the MCS Act and hence question of disclosing said information to the

                                         4

 applicant does not arise at all. The Applicant has not disclosed the purpose for
which he has sought the information. The appellant submits that the information
sought by the applicant is confidential and the same is in respect of commercial
secrets of the business of the bank and 
Section 8
 of RTI Act, specifically states
that- "information including commercial confidence, trade secrets or intellectual
property, the disclosure of which would harm the competitive position of a third
party unless the competent authority are satisfied that larger public interest
warrants the disclosure of such information." And the appellant bank apprehends
that if such confidential information is disclosed, it would be misused and it may
even go in the hands of the competitors of the bank and would also adversely
affect moral of the customers including fixed deposit holders of the bank and
ultimately it may affect stability of the bank. On the contrary there is no public
interest involved in disclosure of the information sought for. The applicant is
seeking confidential information of the bank. This itself shows that there is oblique
motive behind seeking such information and that his application is not given with
bonafide purpose. It is further submitted that reports of RBI are confidential
documents and when copies of said reports are forwarded to the appellant bank,
it is mentioned in para 4 of the covering letter that, "the bank may take necessary
steps to insure confidentiality / secrecy in regard to the findings of the Inspection
Reports. The security and safe custody of the report would be the sole
responsibility of the bank. The copy of Inspection Report should not be submitted
to any authority, including courts without prior written approval of RBI." Thus if
said information is disclosed, it will amount to violation of RBI directions. 4. It is
further submitted that the judgment of RBI vs Jayantilal N Mistry & others which is
relied upon by the First Appellate authority has no application to the facts of the
present case and hence said authority cannot be relied upon. It is also submitted
that the matter regarding as to whether RBI is under obligation to disclose
Inspection Reports to Third Party is pending before the Hon'ble Supreme Court and
it is yet to be decided finally. Hence till the decision of said matter, the First
Appellate Authority ought not have decided the First Appeal. 5. 6. It is also
submitted that the Appellant Bank is a Co Operative Society registered under the

MCS Act
 and hence it is a person and independent".



The Respondent, during the hearing, submitted that the information sought by
the RTI applicant in his RTI application should be disclosed as per Jayantilal Mistry
case.



The Respondent further submitted that the FAA, after going through the notices
issued by the CPIO and the contention raised by the appellant in the appeal, vide
order dated December 10, 2021 dismissed the appeal with the observation that

                                          5

 under the 
RTI Act
, a public authority is expected to provide to the applicant
information which it holds and in order to withhold any information sought by
applicants under the 
RTI Act
, such information should fall within any of the
exempted items under 
sections 8
 and 
9
 of the RTI Act. The FAA further observed
that if any part of the requested information qualifies for exemption, the CPIO
would be free to sever/ black out such part and provide the information. The FAA
referred to and relied upon the judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in

Reserve Bank of India v. Jayantilal N Mistry & Ors.
 (2016) 3 SCC 525 and stated
that in view of the said judgement of the Supreme Court, it would not be possible
to claim exemption from disclosure under 
section 8(1)(d)
 and (e) of the 
RTI Act
. It
was also observed by the FAA that the exemption under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 is available
in respect of "personal information" of an individual and the word 'personal
information' used in 
Section 8(1)(j)
 may not cover the information relating to a
body corporate. If the information includes details of "individuals", the same may
be exempted information under 
section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.




The RTI applicant Shri Rajendra Kantilal submitted that since he is a member of
the Appellant bank, therefore, he is entitled to get the information under the 
RTI
Act
.



Decision:



In the facts of the instant case, it is pertinent to note that a decision of a
coordinate bench of the Commission in the matter of various third-party banks vs.
RBI vide File No. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 covers a
detailed discussion inter alia on the same nature of information sought for from
the RBI and the reliance placed by RBI on the Jayantilal Mistry case. Suffice to say
that the issues raised in the instant case are encapsulated in that same discussion
of the coordinate bench in the following manner:



       "39. A comprehensive view has to be taken on the objection filed by the
institutions. These objectives has to be deliberated and adjudicated in the light of
Jayantilal Mistry's case and other judicial pronouncements relevant in such
matter, some of which have been referred by the Commission in the above parts
as well. The Commission while examining various objections realize that the Writ
Petitions filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is seeking directions of
the Supreme Court for non-disclosure of certain aspects of these audit/inspection
report and any such guidance in these Writ Petitions will have direct bearing and
provide further clarity to the CPIO/FAA in adjudicating various aspects of
disclosure/non-disclosure of reports or the information/data which are part of

                                         6

 these reports under the provisions of the 
RTI Act
. The Commission takes note that
all the cases/second appeals filed herein are based on interpretations of RBI Vs.
Jayantilal Mistry case and other relevant judicial pronouncements requesting for
full disclosure vis-à-vis with exemptions under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act for non-
disclosure of full or parts of these reports.

        40. In view of the above observations, the Commission is of the view that
the reports generated in the hands of regulatory public authority in discharge of
its statutory obligations are information under 
Section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act, as the
regulator and the regulated entities are not governed by fiduciary relationship.
The orders of the Commission to their effect has been upheld by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's case and the position is unchanged even
today. Various objections filed by banks/financial institutions, to be examined,
analyzed and adjudicated upon, are related to various data and information
submitted to the Reserve Bank of India by these financial institutions explaining
their operations, commercial decisions, clients data etc. under statutory
obligations can be disclosed as such. There are apparently two set of such
information which have been shared by the institutions with the regulator under
statutory obligation. First is the information/data of clients relating to their
business/commercial operations, financial transactions, business and commercial
strategy which is shared by clients with financial institutions in full trust and
confidence and is held by them in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure
under the 
RTI Act
 in their hands. Second set is the information relating to business
strategy, decisions, transactions, other operational data etc. of financial
institutions have been bearing on their competitive position which also enjoys the
exemption from disclosure in their hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise,
under the 
RTI Act
. Some of such data, on case to case basis be sensitive enough for
protection of national interest. The Commission is of the view that the protection
of disclosure of information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of
financial institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in
good faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligation. Various
observations of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's case also does not
indicate so and decision of the regulator to consider redacting such
data/information while disclosing the reports is aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts.

        41. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of
the CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care
has to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making
reasoned order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and later
in the hands of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be required to
adjudicate such RTI applications in the light of the observations of the Commission

                                         7

 afresh. The Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various
objections filed by the Banks and Financial Institutions and submissions made by
applicant to reach the decision in favour or against redaction of various parts of
the report on case to case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry case and other relevant judgments, some of
which have been referred in this order as well. Hence, with these observations the
orders passed by the CPIO and FAA in these matters are set aside and the cases
are being remanded to the CPIO for adjudication afresh. (Emphasis Supplied)

       42. It is amply clear that Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and
others tagged are admitted in Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein guidance and
direction has been sought on non-disclosure of certain type of information which
are essentially the part of the Annual Inspection Report/RAR, etc. These petitions
also seek protection of interim communication between regulator and the
regulated entity in the process of finalization of these reports or otherwise. It is
obvious that decision in these Writ Petitions will provide clarity and guidance to
the Public Authority on redaction/non-disclosure of a set of information inspite of
being part of these reports which are open to disclosure. At this stage, any
decision by the Public Authority will amount to pre-judging the issues pending
admitted Writ Petitions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Various banks,
financial institutions, respondent public authority and the RTI applicant have
already impleaded party and are presenting their arguments before the Apex
Court.

       43. Hence, any decision of redaction or disclosure of information, without
waiting for decision in the Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged may cause irrevocable damage against right of privacy and protection of
commercial interest. Hence, the respondent public authority if expedient may
wait for the outcome in Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged or seek clarification from the Hon'ble Court and accordingly decide these
RTI applications by following process as enumerated in the earlier paras by the
Commission in the interest of principles of natural justice. While disclosing the
information they should be cautious in taking a considerate view balancing right
to privacy, protection of national and commercial interest on one hand vis-à-vis
larger public interest. (Emphasis Supplied)

 
44. It is further observed that similar view has also been taken by the
Division Bench of the Commission in file bearing nos. CIC/VS/A/2013/001488 and
CIC/VS/A/2013/001805 dated 11.05.2017 wherein the Commission observed that
'Having considered the submissions of both the parties, the Commission observes
that since a similar issue is pending adjudication before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the matter of Central for 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. &Ors.
, it would be judicious to await the final

                                         8

 outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court. However, on receipt of the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter, the appellant shall be at
liberty to file second appeal afresh, if he so desires. The instant appeals are
disposed of'."




The above decision is therefore applicable to the instant case and no separate line
of adjudication is warranted in the matter. The stipulations contained in File No.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 stands endorsed to the
Respondent CPIO with emphasis on para 41 & 43 supplied as above .



                      The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                        9