[Cites 
52
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Subhash Chandra Agrawal vs Supreme Court Of India on 14 August, 2020


                        CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
                            Appeal No. CICWB/A/2009/000529
                                    dated 29.4.2009


                         
Right to Information Act
 2005 - 
Section 19



Appellant       -         Shri Subhash Chandra Agrawal
Respondent          -     Supreme Court of India (SCI)
                              Decision announced:24.11.2009


Facts:


         By an application of 23.1.09 received by the CPIO on 27.1.09 Shri
Subhash Chandra Agrawal of KuchaLatoo Shah, Dariba, Delhi sought the
following information from the CPIO, Supreme Court of India Shri Raj Pal Arora:

         "Kindly arrange to send me copy of complete file/s (only as
         available in Supreme Court) inclusive of copies of complete
         correspondence exchanged between concerned constitutional
         authorities with file notings relating to said appointment of Mr.
         Justice HL Dattu, Mr. Justice A. K. Ganguly and Mr. Justice RM
         Lodha superseding seniority of Mr. Justice AP Shah, Mr. Justice AK
         Patnaik and Mr. Justice VK Gupta as allegedly objected to Prime
         Minister's Office (PMO) also. Please do not invoke 
section 6 (3)
 on
         this RTI petition, as I need copy of the file on the issue only as
         available at Supreme Court. Kindly attached file notings on
         movement of this RTI petition also. Postal order number 77E
         255672 for rupees ten is enclosed herewith towards RTIfees."



         To this Shri Subhash Chandra Agrawal received a response on 25.2.2009
from CPIO Shri Arora informing him as follows:

         "I write to inform you that this Registry does not deal with the matters
         pertaining to appointment of Hon'ble Judges in the Supreme Court and
         High Court of India. Appointments of Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme
         Court and High Courts are made by the President of India as per the
         procedure prescribed by law and the matters relating thereto are not dealt
         with and handled by the Registry of the Supreme Court of India. Such
         information sought by you is neither maintained nor available in the
         Registry. Hence your request cannot be acceded to under the 
Right to
         Information Act,2005
."



         Not satisfied Shri Agrawal moved an appeal before Shri M.P. Bhadran,

                                            1

 Registrar on 28.2.2009 with the following plea:



 
"I quoted paragraph 81 of the esteemed Supreme Court verdict in
      the matter 
'SP Gupta vs. Union of India
 (1981suppSC87)' "If we
      approach the problem before us in the light of these observations, it
      will be clear that the class of documents consisting of the
      correspondence exchanged between the Law Ministry or other high
      level functionary of the Central Government, the Chief Justice of
      the High Court, the State Government and the Chief Justice of India
      in regard to appointment or non-appointment of a High Court judge
      or Supreme Court judge or the transfer of a High Court Judge and
      the notes made by these constitutional functionaries in that behalf
      cannot be regarded as a protected class entitled to immunity
      against disclosure".




      But instead of providing me copies of sought documents, the
      learned CPIO vide his reply DY. No. 670/RTI/08-09/SCI dated
      25.2.2009 tried to explain me the procedure of appointment of
      judges, which I never tried to enquire."



      This appeal was dismissed on 25.3.09 by appellate authority Shri
Bhadran, as follows:

      "CPIO has informed the appellant that Registry is not dealing with
      the matters pertaining to appointment of Hon'ble Judges in the
      Supreme Court of India, that appointment of Hon'ble Judges of the
      Supreme Court is made by the President of India as per the
      procedure prescribed by law and the matters relating thereto are
      not dealt with and handled by the Registry of Supreme Court of
      India and that such information is neither maintained nor available
      in the Registry. I find no reasons to disagree with the reply
      forwarded by the CPIO to the appellant. The information sought by
      the appellant also does not come within the ambit of 
Sections 2(f)

      and (j) of 
RTI Act
. There is no merit in this appeal and it is only to
      be dismissed."



      Appellant Shri Subhash Chandra Agrawal's prayer before us in his second
appeal is as below:

      "Authorities at Supreme Court may kindly be directed to kindly
      provide me copy of complete file/s (copy as available in Supreme
      Court) inclusive of copies of complete correspondence exchanged
      between concerned constitutional authorities with file notings
      relating to appointment of Mr. Justice HL Dattu, Mr. Justice A. K.
      Ganguly and Mr. Justice RM Lodha superseding seniority of Mr.
      Justice AP Shah, Mr. Justice AK Patnaik and Mr. Justice VK Gupta.



                                        2


        Any other relief deemed fit in favour of the petitioner may kindly be
       allowed."



       The appeal was heard together with appeal Nos. CIC/WB/A/2009/000001,
735, 859, 408, 410, 411 & 530 on 20.11.2009. In this case, however, Shri
DevaduttKamat, Learned Counsel for the Supreme Court sought adjournment,
which was agreed to. The appeal was then heard on 23.11.2009. The following
are present:

 
Appellant
             Sh. Subhash Chandra Agrawal
             Sh. PrashantBhushan, Advocate
             Sh. Mayank Mishra, Advocate
       Respondents
             Sh. Raj Pal Arora, Addl. Registrar / CPIO
             Sh. DevaduttKamat, Advocate for SCI
             Ms. PriyankaTelang, Advocate

       Learned Counsel for respondents Shri DevaduttKamat, submitted a
written statement of his arguments in which his plea is based on the ground that
the information sought by appellant Shri Subhash Chandra Agrawal in the
present case falls squarely within the exemption
 u/s 8(1)(e)
 of the RTI Act. He
has, in this context, closely examined the meaning of the term 'fiduciary' and in
this connection has quoted from the decision of the Supreme Court in 
Subhash
Sharma vs. Union of India
 - (1991) (Supp) 1-SCC 574 specifically with
reference to information held under 
Article 124
 of the Constitution or in discharge
of a trust, as follows:


       "It is a participatory constitutional function. It is, perhaps,
       inappropriate to refer to any 'power' or 'right' to appoint Judges. It
       is essentially a discharge of a constitutional trust of which certain
       constitutional functionaries are collectively repositories.'

       He has gone on to describe the role of the Chief Justice of India in the
appointment process, as below:

       "It is submitted that the Chief Justice of India whilst performing his
       functions under 
Article 124 (2)
 acts in a fiduciary capacity visa a vis
       other judges and Chief Justices of High court. The information
       made available with the Chief Justice in pursuance of his functions



                                         3

       under 
article 124 (2)
 is held in confidence and in trust being the
      pater families of the Judiciary for the purposes for forming an
      opinion under 
article 124 (2).




      In the SC Advocates case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court whilst
      elaborating on the role of chief Justice in the consultation process
      held that the provisions for consultation with CJI was introduced in
      the Constitution as he was best equipped to know and assess the
      worth of the candidate. It is submitted that the 'information' about
      the candidate available with the Chief Justice is in fiduciary capacity
      as the pater families of the Judiciary."



 
Shri Kamat has also quoted from the decision of Justice Verma in
Supreme Court Advocates on 
Record Association vs. Union of India
 -
(1993) 4 SCC 441, as follows:


      "452. This is not surprising if we remember that even in United
      Kingdom where similar judicial appointments are in the absolute
      discretion of the executive, these appointments are made by
      convention on the advice of the Prime Minister after consultation
      with the Lord Chancellor, who himself consults with senior
      members of the judiciary before making his choice or consulting
      with the Prime Minister and the Prime Minister would depart from
      the recommendations of the Lord Chancellor only in the most
      exceptional case. (See The Politics of Judiciary- J.A. G. Griffith at
      pp. 17-18). The Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay speaking recently
      on 'The Role of the Judge in a Democracy said:



      One of the most important responsibilities of a Lord Chancellor in
      our democracy is for judicial appointments. It is my duty to ensure
      that neither political bias, nor personal favouritism, nor animosity
      play any party in the appointment of judges and that they are
      selected regardless of sex, ethnic origin or religion on the basis of
      their fitness to carry out the solemn responsibility of judicial office. I
      look for those with integrity, professional ability, experience, and
      standing, a sound temperament and good health. To achieve this I
      consult widely and regularly with the judges, Law Lords and other
      members of the legal profession. I naturally attach particular
      importance to the opinion of the Division of the High Court. Judges
      therefore have an important role in judicial appointments, albeit
      informally father than prescribed by statute." (Emphasis supplied)."



      He has further gone on to contest the application of the observations of
the learned Single Judge in W.P.No.288/2009 paras 54 to 59 in which Justice




                                         4

 Ravinder Bhat has examined the application of the term fiduciary relationship,
contending that the learned Judge "has not at all held that the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court does not act in a fiduciary capacity vis a vis Judges or Chief
Justices of the High court." He has then argued as below:

      "It is submitted that the information sought for relates to the
      personal information relating to the suitability of a candidate. It is
      submitted that the information sought for is pure and simple
      personal information relating to the judges which is exempt from
      disclosure.'

      In support of this line of argument, learned counsel for respondents Shri
DevaduttKamat has then gone on to quote extensively from Supreme Court
Advocates case referred to above, as below:

      "462. The constitutional purpose to be served by these provisions
      is to select the best from amongst those available for appointment
      as judges of the superior judiciary, after consultation with those
      functionaries who are best suited to make the selection. It is
      obvious that only those persons should be considered fit for
      appointment as judges of the superior judiciary who combine the
      attributes essential for making an able, independent and fearless
      judge. Several attributes together combine to constitute such a
      personality. Legal expertise, ability to handle cases, proper
      personal conduct and ethical attributes of a person suitable for
      appointment as a superior judge. The initial appointment of judges
      in the High Courts is made from the Bar and the subordinate
      judiciary. Appointment to the Supreme Court is mainly from
      amongst High Court Judges, and on occasions directly from the
      Bar. The arena of performance of those men are the courts. It is,
      therefore, obvious that the maximum opportunity for adjudging their
      ability and traits, is in the Courts and, therefore, the judges are best
      suited to assess their true worth and fitness for appointment as
      Judges. This is obviously the reason for introducing                 the
      requirement of consultation with the Chief Justice of India in the
      matter of appointment of all Judges, and with the Chief Justice of
      the High Court in the case of appointment of a Judge in a High
      Court. Even the personal traits of the members of the Bar and the
      Judges are quite often fully known to the Chief Justice of India and
      the Chief Justice of the High Court who get such information from
      various sources. There may, however, be some personal trait of an
      individual lawyer or Judge, which may be better known to the
      executive and may be unknown to the Chief Justice of India and the
      Chief Justice of the High Court, and which may be relevant for




                                        5

       assessing his potentially to become a good judge. It is for this
      reason, that the executive is also one of the consultees in the
      process of appointment. The object of selecting the best men to
      constitute the superior judiciary is achieved by requiring
      consultation with not only the judiciary but also the executive to
      ensure that every relevant particular about the candidate is known
      and duly weighed as a result of effective consultation between all
      the consultees before the appointment is made."



      He has then concluded that there is no public interest involved in the
present case and that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the Supreme Court
Advocates case has specifically held that public interest lies in keeping
appointments and transfers undisclosed. He has, in this context, gone on to
again quote from this decision, as below:

      "This is also in accord with the public interest of excluding these
      appointments and transfers from litigative debate, to avoid any
      erosion in the credibility of the decisions, and to ensure a free and
      frank expression of hones to opinion by all the constitutional
      functionaries, which is essential for effective consultation and for
      taking the right decision. The growing tendency of needless
      intrusion by strangers and busybodies in the functioning of the
      judiciary under the garb of public interest litigation."



 
Learned Counsel has contested the reliance of appellant on the decision
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
S. P. Gupta vs. Union of India
 (1981) (Supp)
SCC 87. Finally learned Counsel Sh. Kamat has rested his arguments on a
decision of this Commission of 2006 in Sh. Mukesh Kumar vs. Supreme Court
of India in F. No. CIC/AT/A/2006/00113 in which we have held as follows:


      "Arguably, there is merit in the contention that certain processes
      are best conducted away from the public gaze, for that is what
      contributes to sober analysis and mature reflection, unaffected by
      competing pressures and public scrutiny. If there is one process
      which needs to be so protected, the process of selecting the judges
      of the High Court's and the Supreme Court must quality to be one
      such.'

      
In light of a subsequent decision of this Commission Shri Kamal has
invited our attention to the ruling of the Supreme Court in 
Companies Textiles
Industries Ltd. vs. Deepak Jain
 and anr. In Civil Appeal No.1743/2009



                                       6

 decided on March 20, 2009 in which the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as
follows:


       "We are also constrained to observe that while dealing with the
       second revision petition, the High Court failed to take into
       consideration the order passed by a learned Single Judge on
       21.8.2002 whereby the executing court was directed to conducted
       inquiry in regard to the status of the objector to the execution
       proceedings. Time and again it has been emphasised that judicial
       prosperity and decorum requires that if a Single Judge, hearing a
       matter, feels that earlier decision of a Single Judge needs
       reconsideration, he should not embark upon that enquiry, sitting as
       a Single Judge, but should refer the matter to a larger bench.
       Regrettably, in the present case, the learned Single judge departed
       from the said healthy principle and chose to re-examine the same
       question himself.'

He has gone on to provide a very detailed argument in this regard, as below:

       "It is well settled that a coordinate bench cannot overrule an earlier
       decision of the same strength. It is submitted that the decision in
       Mukesh Kumar's case has not been expressly overruled by any of
       the decisions of this Commission. No appeal also appears to have
       been filed against the said decision. In these circumstances, the
       decision in Mukesh Kumar's case is binding unless overturned by a
       larger bench. It has already been pointed out that the larger bench
       decisions of this Commission did not deal with the position of the
       Chief Justice and the issues, which arose in Mukesh Kumar's case,
       did not arise for consideration in the other decisions.



       The Hon'ble Supreme Court in S. I. Rooplal&Anr. Vs. Lt. Governor through
Chief Secretary, Delhi (2000) 1 SCC 644 has laid down that it is not open for a
bench of coordinate jurisdiction to overrule a decision rendered by another
coordinate bench of the same strength. It was held that:

       "At the outset, we must express our serious dissatisfaction to
       regard to the manner in which a coordinate Bench of the tribunal
       has overrules, in effect, an earlier judgment of another coordinate
       Bench of the same tribunal. This is opposed to all principles of
       judicial discipline. It at all, the subsequent Bench of the tribunal
       was of the opinion that the earlier view taken by the coordinate
       Bench of the same tribunal was incorrect, it ought to have referred
       the matter to a larger Bench so that the difference of opinion
       between the two coordinate Benches on the same point could have
       been avoided."



                                        7


       Learned counsel Shri Kamat has therefore conclude that we cannot rely
on the subsequent decisions of this Commission, which moreover have been
challenged in Writ before the High Court of Delhi, but instead place reliance on
our decision in Sh. Mukesh Kumar vs. Supreme Court of India in F. No.
CIC/AT/A/2006/00113, which moreover stands without challenge.



 
Learned Counsel for appellant Shri Prashant Bhushan on the other hand
submitted that the decision of this Commission cited by learned Counsel for
respondents Shri DevaduttKamat is overridden not by the subsequent decisions
of this Commission in CIC/WB/A/2006/00460 announced on 23.3.2007 and
CIC/AT/A/2008/00736 announced on 19.1.2009 but by the decision of Justice
Bhagwati in 
S.P. Gupta vs. Union of India
 - AIR (1982) SC 149 upon which the
decision of this Commission of 23.3.07 is based. Besides, on the principle of per
incurismthe decision of 23.3.2007 cannot be invalidated on the basis of the
earlier decision of this Commission cited by learned Counsel for respondents as
that decision was never brought to the notice of the Commission in its hearing on
16.3.2007 and, therefore, finds no reference in the decision of 23.3.2007 in File
No. CIC/WB/A/2006/00460.
 
He has then gone on to quote from the decision of
the Supreme Court in 
S.P. Gupta vs. Union of India
 - AIR (1982) SC 149, upon
which he has relied, as follows:




      82. These selfsame reasons must apply equally in negativing the
      claim for immunity in respect of the correspondence between the
      Law Minister and the Chief Justice of India and the relevant notings
      made by them in regard to the transfer of a High Court Judge
      including the Chief Justice of a High Court. These documents are
      extremely material for deciding whether there was full and effective
      consultation with the Chief Justice of India before effecting the
      transfer and the transfer was made in public interest, both of which
      are, according to the view taken by us, justiciable issues and
      thenon disclosure of these documents would seriously
      handicap the petitioner in showing that there was no full and
      effective consultation with the Chief Justice of India or that the
      transfer was by way of punishment and not in public interest. It
      would become almost impossible for the petitioner, without the aid
      of these documents, to establish his case, even if it be true.

      Moreover, the transfer of a High Court Judge or Chief Justice of a
      High Court is a very serious matter and if made arbitrarily or capriciously
      or by way of punishment or without public interest motivation, it would

                                          8

  erode the independence of the judiciary which is a basic feature of the
 Constitution and therefore, when such a charge is made it is in public
 interest that it should be fully investigated and all relevant
 documents should be produced before the court so that the full
 facts may come before the people, who in a democracy are the
 ultimate arbiters. It would be plainly contrary to public interest to allow
 the inquiry into such a charge to be baulked or frustrated by a claim for
 immunity in respect of documents essential to the inquiry. It is also
 important to note that when the transfer of a High Court Judge or Chief
 Justice of a High Court is challenged, the burden of showing that there
 was full and effective consultation with the Chief Justice of India and the
 transfer was effected in public interest is on the Union of India and it
 cannot withhold the relevant documents in its possession on a plea of
 immunity and expect to discharge this burden by a mere statement in an
 affidavit. Besides, if the reason for excluding these documents is to
 safeguard the proper functioning of the higher organs of the State
 including the judiciary, then that reason is wholly inappropriate where
 what is charged is the grossly improper functioning of those very organs.
 It is, Court Judge or Chief Justice of a High Court is challenged, no
 immunity can be claimed in respect of the correspondence exchanged
 between the Law Minister and the Chief Justice of India and the notings
 made by them, since, on the balance, the non-disclosure of these
 documents would cause greater injury to public interest than what may be
 caused by their disclosure. (Emphasis added)


83. But, quite apart from these considerations, we do not understand
how the disclosure of the correspondence exchanged between the
Law Minister, the Chief Justice of the High Court, the State
Government and the Chief Justice of India and the relevant notes
made by them in regard to non appointment of an Additional Judge for
a further term or transfer of a High Court Judge can be detrimental to
public interest. It was argued by the learned Solicitor-General on behalf
of the Union of India that if the Chief Justice of the High Court and the
Chief Justice of India differ in their views in regard to the suitability of
an Additional Judge for further appointment, the disclosure of their
views would cause considerable embarrassment because the rival
views might be publicly debated and there might be captious and
uninformed criticism which might have the effect of undermining the
prestige and dignity of one or the other Chief Justice and shaking the
confidence of the people in the administration of justice. If the
difference in the views expressed by the Chief Justice of the High
Court and the Chief Justice of India becomes publicly known,





                                     9

 contended the learned Solicitor-General, it might create a difficult
situation for the Chief Justice of the High Court vis-à-vis the Chief
Justice of India and if despite the adverse opinion of the Chief Justice
of the High Court, the Additional Judge is continued for a further term,
and the Additional Judge knows that he has been so continued
overruling the view of the Chief Justice of the High Court, it might lead
to a certain amount of friction which would be detrimental to the proper
functioning of the High Court. So also if an Additional Judge is
continued for a further term accepting the view expressed by the Chief
Justice of the High Court and rejecting the opinion of the Chief Justice
of India, it would against create a piquant situation because it would
affect the image of the Chief Justice of India in the public eyes.
Moreover, a feeling might be created in the mind of the public that a
person who was regarded as unsuitable for judicial appointment by
one or the other of the two Chief Justices, has been appointed as a
Judge and the litigants would be likely to have reservations about him
and the confidence of the people in the administration of justice would
be affected. The learned Solicitor-General contended that for these
reasons it would be injurious to public interest to disclose the
correspondence exchanged between the Law Minister, the Chief
Justice or the High Court and the Chief Justice of India.



84. We have given our most anxious thought to this argument urged by
the leaned Solicitor General, but we do not think we can accept it. We
do not see any reason why, if the correspondence between the Law
Minister, the Chief Justice of the High Court and the Chief Justice of
India and the relevant notes made by them, in regard to
discontinuance of an Additional Judge are relevant to the issues
arising in a judicial proceeding, they should not be disclosed. There
might be difference of views between the Chief Justice of the High
Court and the Chief Justice of India but so long as the views are held
bona fide by the two Chief Justices, we do not see why they should be
worried about the disclosure of their views? Why should they feel
embarrassed by public discussion or debate of the views expressed by
them when they have acted bona fide with the greatest care and
circumspection and after mature deliberation. Do Judges sitting on a
Division Bench not differ from each other in assessment of evidence
and reach directly contrary conclusions on questions of fact? Do they
not express their judicial opinions boldly and fearlessly leaving it to the
jurists to decide which of the two differing opinions is correct? If two
Judges do not feel any embarrassment in coming to different findings
of fact which may be contrary to each other, why should two Chief
Justices feel embarrassed if the opinions given by them in regard to
the suitability of an Additional Judge for further appointment differ and
such differing opinions are made known to the public. Not only
tolerance but acceptance of bonafide difference of opinion is a part of




                                    10

 judicial discipline and we find it difficult to believe that the disclosure of
their differing opinions might create a strain in the relationship between
the Chief Justice of the High Court and the Chief Justice of India. We
have no doubt that the Chief Justice of the High Court would come to
his own independent opinion on the material before him and he would
not surrender his judgment to the Chief Justice of India, merely
because the Chief Justice of India happens to be head of the judiciary
having a large voice in the appointment of Judges on the Supreme
Court Bench. Equally we are confident that merely because the Chief
Justice of the High Court has come to a different opinion and is not
prepared to change that opinion despite the persuasion of the Chief
Justice of India, no offence would be taken by the Chief Justice of India
and he would not harbour any feeling of resentment against the Chief
Justice of the High Court. Both the Chief Justices have trained judicial
minds and both of them would have the humility to recognize that they
can be mistaken in their opinions. We do not therefore see any real
possibility of estrangement or even embarrassment for the two Chief
Justices, if their differing views in regard to the suitability of an
Additional Judge for further appointment are disclosed. We also find it
difficult to agree that if the differing views of the two Chief Justices
become known to the outside world, the public discussion and debate
that might ensue might have the effect of lowering the dignity and
prestige of one or the other of the two Chief Justices. When the
differing views of the two Chief Justices are made public as a result of
disclosure, there would certainly be public discussion and debate in
regard to those views with some criticizing one view and some
criticising the other, but that cannot be helped in a democracy where
the right of free speech and expression is a guaranteed right and if the
views have been expressed by the two Chief Justices with proper care
and deliberation and a full sense of responsibility in discharge of a
constitutional duty, there is no reason why the two Chief Justices
should worry about public criticism. We fail to see how such public
criticism could have the effect of undermining the prestige and dignity
of one or the other Chief Justice. So long as the two Chief Justices
have acted honestly and bona fide with full consciousness of the heavy
responsibility that rests upon them in matters of this kind, we do not
think that any amount of public criticism can affect their prestige and
dignity. But if either of the two Chief Justices has acted carelessly or
improperly or irresponsibly or out of oblique motive, his view would
certainly be subjected to public criticism and censure and that might
show him in poor light and bring him down in the esteem of the people,
but that will be the price which he will have to pay for his remissness in
discharge of his constitutional duty. No Chief Justice or Judge should
be allowed to hide his improper or irresponsible action under the clock
of secrecy. If any Chief Justice or Judge has behaved improperly or
irresponsibly or in a manner not befitting the high office he holds, there




                                     11

 is no reason why his action should not be exposed to public gaze. We
believe in an open government and openness in government does
not mean openness merely in the functioning of the executive
arm of the State. The same openness must characterize the
functioning of the judicial apparatus including judicial
appointments and transfer. Today the process of judicial
appointments and transfers is shrouded in mystery. The public does
not know how Judges are selected and appointed or transferred and
whether any and if so what, principles and norms govern this process.
The exercise of the power of appointment and transfer remains a
sacred ritual whose mystery is confined only to a handful of high
priests, namely the Chief Justice of the High Court, the Chief Minister
of the State, the Law Minister of the Central Government and the Chief
Justice of India. In case of appointment or non appointment of a High
Court Judge and the Law Minister of the Central Government and the
Chief Justice of India in case of appointment of a Supreme Court
Judge or transfer of a High Court Judge. The mystique of this process
is kept secret and confidential between just a few individuals, not more
than two or four as the case may be, and the possibility cannot
therefore be ruled out that howsoever highly placed may be these
individuals, the process may on occasions result in making of wrong
appointments and transfers and may also at times, though fortunately
very rare, lend itself to nepotism, political as well as personal and even
trade off. We do not see any reason why this process of appointment
and transfer of Judges should be regarded as so sacrosanct that no
one should be able to pry into it and it should not be protected against
disclosure at all events and in all circumstances. Where it becomes
relevant in a judicial proceeding, why should the Court and the
opposite party and through them the people not know what are the
reasons for which a particular appointment is made or a particular
Additional Judge is discontinued or a particular transfer is affected. We
fail to see what harm can be caused by the disclosure of true facts
when they become relevant in a judicial proceeding. In fact, the
possibility of subsequent disclosure would act as an effective check
against carelessness, impetuosity, arbitrariness or mala fides on the
part of the Central Government, the Chief Justice of the High Court
and the Chief Justice of India and ensure bona fide and correct
approach objective and dispassionate consideration, mature thought
and deliberation and proper application of mind on their part in
discharging their constitutional duty in regard to appointments and
transfers of Judges. It is true that if the views expressed by the Chief
Justice of the High Court and the Chief Justice of India in regard to the
suitability of an Additional Judge for further appointment become
known to the public, they might reflect adversely on the competence,
character or integrity of the Additional Judge, but the Additional Judge
cannot legitimately complain about it, because it would be at his




                                   12

      instance that the disclosure would be ordered and the views of the two
     Chief Justices made public. If the Additional Judge is appointed for a
     further term either accepting the opinion expressed by the Chief
     Justice of the High Court in preference to that of the Chief Justice of
     India or vice versa, the question of disclosure of differing opinions of
     the two Chief Justices would not arise, because no one would know
     that the two Chief Justices were not agreed on continuing the
     Additional Judge for a further term and therefore, ordinarily, there
     would be no challenge to the appointment of the Additional Judge. It is
     only if the Additional Judge is not continued for a further term that he or
     someone on his behalf may challenge the decision of the Central
     Government not to continue him and in that event, if he asks for
     disclosure of the relevant correspondence embodying the views of the
     two Chief Justices, and if such disclosure is ordered, he has only
     himself to thank for it and in any event, in such a case there would be
     no harm done to public interest if the views expressed by the two Chief
     Justices become known to the public." . (Emphasisadded)"



      This decision stands and has neither been challenged nor modified by any
subsequent decision of the Supreme Court.



      Shri Prashant Bhushan further submitted that respondent has not taken
the plea of exemption
 u/s 8(1)(e)
 earlier nor the plea that the information sought
is not under the control of Chief Justice of India, as a public authority. However,
he conceded that in case the information sought contained any information of a
personal nature warranting exemption
 u/s 8(1)(j)
, this can be exempted under the
severability clause contained in 
Sec. 10(1)
 while making the disclosure.



DISCUSSION & DECISION NOTICE
      . Because respondents have not raised the issue now raised either in
refusing the information in the initial stage or in considering the appeal, we
cannot now hold that in consequence they are debarred from taking this plea at
this stage. This was indeed the plea taken by the Registry of the Supreme Court
of India in its Writ Petition No.2008/09 moved before the High Court of Delhi
against an earlier decision of this Commission but since in the decision of Justice
RavinderBhat in WP(C) 228/2009, CPIO Supreme Court of 
India vs. SC
Agrawal&Anr.itisconcededthattheChiefJusticeofIndiaisindeedapublic


                                         13

 authority, it is in that context that the present plea for exemption has been taken.
Therefore, this contention of appellant is unsustainable.




       On the other hand, the question lies squarely on whether the ruling of
Justice RavinderBhat in this case on the question of fiduciary relationship will be
applicable in the present case. His ruling is as follows:

       54. The petitioners argue that assuming that asset declarations, in
       terms of the 1997 constitute "information" under the Act, yet they
       cannot be disclosed - or even particulars about whether, and who
       made such declarations, cannot be disclosed - as it would entail
       breach of a fiduciary duty by the CJI. The petitioners rely on
       
Section 8 (1) (f)
 to submit that a public authority is under no
       obligation to furnish "information available to a person in his
       fiduciary relationship". The petitioners emphasize that the 1997
       Resolution crucially states that:

               "The declaration made by the Judges or the Chief Justice, as
               the case may be, shall be confidential."

       The respondent, and interveners, counter the submission and say
       that CJI does not stand in the position of a fiduciary to the judges of
       the Supreme Court, who occupy high Constitutional office; they
       enjoy the same judicial powers, and immunities and that the CJI
       cannot exercise any kind of control over them. In these
       circumstances, there is no "fiduciary" relationship, least of all in
       relation to making the asset declarations available to the CJI, who
       holds it because of his status as CJI. It is argued that a fiduciary
       relationship is created, where one person depends, on, or entrusts
       his affairs to 55. It is necessary to first discern what a fiduciary
       relationship is, since the term has not been defined in the Act. In
       Bristol & West Building Society v. Mathew [1998] Ch 1, the term
       "fiduciary", was described as under:

               "A fiduciary is someone who has undertaken to act for and
               on behalf of another in a particular matter in circumstances
               which give rise to a relationship of trust andconfidence."

 
Dale & Carrington Invt. (
P) Ltd. v. P.K. Prathapan
, (
2005) 1 SCC
       212 and Needle Industries (India) Ltd v. Needle Industries (Newey)
       India Holding Ltd
: 1981 (3) SCC 333 establish that Directors of a
       company owe fiduciary duties to its shareholders.
 In P.V.
       SankaraKurup v. LeelavathyNambiar, (1994) 6 SCC 68, the
       Supreme Court held that an agent and power of attorney holder can
       be said to owe a fiduciary relationship to the principal.

       56. 
In a recent decision (
Mr. Krishna GopalKakani v. Bank of
       Baroda
 2008 (13) SCALE 160) the Supreme Court had to decide
       whetheratrans action resulted in a fiduciary relationship. Money




                                         14

 was sought to be recovered by the plaintiff, from a bank, who had
moved the court for auction of goods imported, and retained the
proceeds; the trail court overruled the objection to maintainability,
stating that the bank held the surplus (of the proceeds) in a
fiduciary capacity. The High Court upset the trial court's findings,
ruling that the bank did not act in a fiduciary capacity. The Supreme
Court affirmed the High Court's findings. The court noticed 
Section
88
 of the Trusts Act, which reads as follows:


        "Section 88. Advantage gained by fiduciary. - Where a
        trustee, executor, partner, agent, director of a company,
        legal advisor, or other person bound in a fiduciary character
        to protect the interests of another person, by availing himself
        of his character, gains for himself any pecuniary advantage,
        or where any person so are, or may be, adverse to those of
        such other person and thereby gains for himself a pecuniary
        advantage, he must hold for the benefit of such other person
        the advantage sogained."

Affirming the High Court's findings that the bank did not owe a
fiduciary responsibility to the appellant, it was held by the Supreme
Court, that:

        "9. An analysis of this Section would show that the Bank, to
        whom the money had been entrusted, was not in the
        capacity set out in the provision itself. The question of any
        fiduciary relationship therefore arising between the two must
        therefore be ruled out. It bears reiteration that there is no
        evidence to show that any trust had been created with
        respect to the suit money."

The following kinds of relationships may broadly be categorized as
"fiduciary":

 Trustee/beneficiary (
Section 88
, Indian Trusts Act,1882)
 Legal guardians / wards (
Section 20
, Guardians and Wards
    Act,1890)
 Lawyer/client;

 Executors and administrators / legatees and heirs
 Board of directors /company
 Liquidator/company
 Receivers, trustees in bankruptcy and assignees in insolvency /
    creditors
 Doctor/patient
 Parent/child:



57. The Advanced Law Lexicon, 3rd Edition, 2005, defines fiduciary
relationship as
        "a relationship in which one person is under a duty to act for
        the benefit of the other on the matters within the scope of the
        relationship....Fiduciary relationship usually arise in one of



                                  15

         the four situations (1) when one person places trust in the
        faithful integrity of another, who is a result gains superiority
        or influence over the first, (2) when one person assumes
        control and responsibility over another, (3) when one person
        has a duty to act or give advice to another on matters falling
        within the scope of the relationship, or (4) when there is
        specific relationship that has traditionally be recognized as
        involving fiduciary duties, as with a lawyer and a client, or a
        stockbroker and a customer"

58. From the above discussion, it may be seen that a fiduciary
relationship is one whereby a person places complete confidence in
another in regard to a particular transaction or his general affairs or
business. The relationship need not be "formally" or "legally"

ordained, or established, like in the case of a written trust; but can
be one of moral or personal responsibility, due to the better or
superior knowledge or training, or superior status of the fiduciary as
compared to the one whose affairs he handles. If viewed from this
perspective, it is immediately apparent that the CJI cannot be a
fiduciary vis-à-vis Judges of the Supreme Court; he cannot be said
to have superior knowledge, or be better trained, to aid or control
their affairs or conduct. Judges of the Supreme Court hold
independent office, and are there is no hierarchy, in their judicial
functions, which places them at a different plane than the CJI. In
these circumstances, it cannot be held that asset information
shared with the CJI, by the judges of the Supreme Court, are held
by him in the capacity of a fiduciary, which if directed to be
revealed, would result in breach of such duty. So far as the
argument that the 1997 Resolution had imposed a confidentiality
obligation on the CJI to ensure non-disclosure of the asset
declarations, is concerned, the court is of opinion that with the
advent of the Act, and the provision in 
Section 22
 - which overrides
all other laws, etc. (even overriding the 
Official Secrets Act
) the
argument about such a confidentiality condition is on a weak
foundation. The mere marking of a document, as "confidential", in
this case, does not undermine the over bearing nature of Section

22. Concededly, the confidentiality clause (in the 1997 Resolution)
operated, and many might have bona fide believed that it would
ensure immunity from access. Yet the advent of the Act changed all
that; all classes of information became its subject matter. 
Section
8(1) (f)
 affords protection to one such class, i.e. fiduciaries. The
content of such provision may include certain kind of relationships
of public officials, such as doctor-patient relations; teacher-pupil
relationships, in government schools and colleges; agents of
governments; even attorneys and lawyers who appear and advise
public authorities covered by the Act. However, it does not cover





                                  16

       asset declarations made by Judges of the Supreme Court, and held
      by the CJI.

      59. For the above reasons, the court concludes the petitioners'
      argument about the CJI holding asset declarations in a fiduciary
      capacity, (which would be breached if it is directed to be disclosed,
      in the manner sought by the applicant) to be insubstantial. The CJI
      does not hold such declarations in a fiduciary capacity or
      relationship.



 
No doubt this ruling has been challenged before a Division Bench of the
Delhi High Court, which has also heard the same. However, this issue is not, as
conceded by both parties, an issue that is impugned. The only plea taken here
by the learned Counsel for respondents in this regard is that this particular ruling
will not apply in the present case. Learned Counsel contests this conclusion for
appellant on the basis of the ruling of Justice Bhagwati in the case of 
S. P. Gupta
vs. Union of India
 quoted above.




      The question then arises as to whether in light of the argument of learned
counsel for respondents that a Coordinate Bench cannot overrule a decision of
another Coordinate Bench of the same Commission, this Commission is at liberty
to take a decision contrary to its decision in Mukesh Kumar vs. Supreme Court
of India without reference to a larger Bench. This would have to be seen in light
of the arguments of learned counsel for respondents submitted in his written
arguments, which is as follows:

      "It is respectfully submitted that the consultation process and the
      primacy of the opinion of the Chief Justice of India is facet of
      Judicial Independence. It is submitted that it is now well settled that
      the judicial independence is now one of the corner stone's of our
      constitutional democracy. Judicial Independence demands that the
      consultation process should be conducted in an atmosphere sober
      analysis unaffected by competing pressures. Intrusion by strangers
      and busy bodies needs to be eschewed."



 
In our view the decision of this Commission in Mukesh Kumar vs.
Supreme Court of India cannot stand overridden by the decision dated
23.3.2007 of this Commission in 
File No. CIC/WB/A/2006/00460 - S. C.




                                        17

 Agrawal vs. President
's Secretariat & Department of Justice.
 
Instead it is
countered by the conclusion of the Supreme Court of India in 
S. P. Gupta vs.
Union of India
 precisely through the paragraphs drawn from this decision,
quoted in our own decision of 23.3.2007. Besides, 
Sec. 11(1)
 has also been
sought as a reason for refusing disclosure in Mukesh Kumar vs. Supreme
Court of India is not a clause that allows for exemption from disclosure but only
a clause prescribing the procedure for allowing a third party to seek exemption
from disclosure of any information intended to be disclosed.




 
Nevertheless, the definition of the applicability of the clause of fiduciary
relationship i.e. exemption
 u/s 8(1)(e)
 dwelt in detail by the Hon'ble Justice
RavinderBhat in W.P. No. 288/09, quoted above, will now have the effect of
overriding any earlier decision of this Commission in this regard. The question is
that will this definition apply in the present case, a fact that has been challenged
by respondents. It is without doubt that the detailed exemption on the question of
the fiduciary relationship in 
the above decision
 does not pertain to the kind of
disclosure that has been sought in the present appeal since that was regarding
disclosure of information regarding property statements whereas in the present
case the issue is one of personnel administration. Nevertheless, as will be clear
from the judgment that we have deliberately taken some pains to describe in
detail above would clearly show its applicability over a much larger canvas than
only a particular Writ Petition itself in the context of which it has been arrived at.
The principles on which the fiduciary relationship can be relied on to seek
exemption have been clearly laid down. In the present case excluding personal
information, which in any case will be deleted under the severability clause in any
disclosure order, the recommendation of appointment of justices is decidedly a
public activity conducted in the overriding public interest. Hence the plea of
seeking exemption under the definition of fiduciary relationship cannot stand, and
even if accepted in technical terms, will not withstand the test of public interest.




                                          18


          For the above reasons this appeal is allowed. The information sought
  by appellant Shri Subhash Chandra Agrawal will now be provided to him within
  15 working days of the date of receipt of this Decision Notice There will be no
  costs. Since the information was not provided within the time specified for the
  same, it will now be provided free of cost under sub sec. (6) of 
Sec. 7
.



         Reserved in the hearing, this Decision is announced in the open
  chamber on this 24th day of November 2009. Notice of this decision be given
  free of cost to the parties.



  (Wajahat Habibullah)
  Chief Information
  Commissioner 24.11.2009

   Authenticated true copy. Additional copies of orders shall be supplied against
   application and payment of the charges, prescribed under the Act, to the
   CPIO of this Commission.



(Pankaj Shreyaskar)
Joint Registrar
24.11.2009


                   CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
       Appeal No. CIC/WB/A/2009/0001, 735, 859, 408, 410, 411 and 530
                              dated 24-12-2008
                 
Right to Information Act
 2005 - 
Section 19


  Appellant:           Shri S.C.Agrawal,
  Respondent:          Supreme Court of India (SCI)
                         Decision Announced 20/24.11.09


  FACTS
        These are seven (7) appeals received from Shri S.C. Agrawal of Dariba,
  Delhi seeking information from CPIO, Supreme Court of India. Since all these
  cases concern information claimed to be held by the Chief Justice of India and
  therefore, requires determination of the scope of the access allowed through
  the Registry of the SCI they have been clubbed together for hearing.



                                         19


 File No. CIC/WB/A/2009/0001
       In this case the information sought by Shri S.C. Agrawal through an
application of 12-10-2008 from CPIO, Shri Rajpal Arora, Addl. Registrar, SCI
is as follows:

       "1. Copy of the mentioned letter dated 14.10.2008 by
            Honourable the Chief Justice of India to Chief Justices of
            High Courts asking them to retire lower court judges with
            indolent, infirm and with doubtful reputation.

       2.   Copy of terms and conditions required by judges in lower
            courts especially in reference to their pre-matured
            retirement.

       3.   Criterion to judge lower-court judges about their being
            indolent, infirm and/ or with doubtful reputation.

       4.   Authority writing Annual Confidential Report (ACRs) of
            lower court judges.

       5.   Safeguard for lower court judges against any possible
            pressure from those writing theirACRs.

       6.   Criterion for promoting District Court Judges to High
            Courts.

       7.   Any other related information.

       8.   File notings."



       To this Shri S.C. Agrawal received a response dated 7-11-08 from
CPIO, SCI Shri Rajpal Arora as follows:

       "1.   You are required to send Rs. 4/- either in cash or by way
              of Money Order or Demand Draft drawn in favourof
              Registrar, Supreme Court of India for obtaining
              photocopy of letter dated 14.10.2008 written by Hon'ble
              the Chief Justice of India to Hon'ble Chief Justices of all
              High Courts.

       2.     The information is neither maintained nor available in the
              Registry of Supreme Court of India.

       3.     No file notings are available."



       Not satisfied appellant Shri Agrawal moved a second appeal on 11-11-
'08 before Shri M.P. Bhadran, Registrar, SCI with the following plea:

       "For information on point numbers from 2 to 7 his reply was the
       information is neither maintained or available in the Registry of
       Supreme Court.



       I appeal that the learned CPIO may kindly be directed to transfer
       my RTI petition for rest of the queries under 
section 6 (3)
 of the RTI
       Act to the concerned public authority. Copy of the letter as
       mentioned in point number I may kindly be sent to me for which I
       have paid required copying charges with this letter."



                                       20


       In his order of 8-12-08 appellate authority Shri M.P. Bhadran, Registrar
found as follows:

      "In the appeal memorandum appellant has made a request to
      direct the CPIO to transfer his application for rest of the queries
      under 
section 6 (3)
 of the RTI Act to the concerned public
      authority.



      In fact, information sought on points 2 to 7 are in respect of the
      Judges of Lower Court. The information sought by the appellant
      is not confined to any particular High court or State. So, it was
      not possible for the CPIO to transfer the application of the
      appellant to any particular State of to any public authority. I find
      no error in the impugned order. There is no merit in this appeal
      and it is only to be dismissed."



                                      21


 below:



         22


 Appellant Shri Agrawal's prayer before us in his second appeal is as


"But query numbers 2 to 7 are basically based on aspects mentioned in
letter dated 14.10.2008 of Honourable the Chief Justice of India to Chief
Justice of States, for which the CPIO has already responded favourably
under query 1 of my RTI petition by sending a copy of the said letter.
Therefore, the petitioner is also entitled to get replies to related query
numbers 2 to 7 through public authorities at Supreme Court. After all a
letter written by Honourable the Chief Justice of India has to be based
on some procedures, norms and guidelines to be followed in the
system, and the petitioner has made queries relating to these
procedures etc only and not at all relating to any particular state or court.
Therefore, I pray that CPIO at Supreme Court may kindly be directed to
respond to my queries 2 to 7. Also file notings as requested in query 8
may kindly be allowed to be provided. It is prayed accordingly.'

 File No. CIC/WB/A/2009/0735
        In this case the information sought by Shri S.C. Agrawal through an
 application of 5-5-2009 from CPIO, Shri Rajpal Arora, Addl. Registrar, SCI is
 as follows:

        "Action taken on my letter dated 4.4.2009 addressed to
        Honourable Chief Justice of India bout Additional District Judge
        Shri A. K. Sripal at Tis Hazari Courts in Delhi. In case my letter
        is transferred to some other public authority, kindly transfer this
        RTI petition to the CPIO there so that I may be provided
        information on ultimate action by any concerned authority on my
        mentioned letter dated 4.4.2009 addressed to Honourable Chief
        Justice of India (copy enclosed).



        Please arrange file notings by all the concerned public authorities
        on movement of my letter dated 4.4.2009 addressed to Honourable
        Chief Justice of India, and also on movement of this RTI petition."



        To this Shri S.C. Agrawal received a response dated 29-5-09 from
 CPIO, Shri Rajpal Arora as follows:

        "I write to say that your letter dated 4.4.2009 was placed before
        Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India on 9.4.2009 and as directed
        by Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India, the same was filed.



        Further, you are required to send Rs. 4/- for obtaining two pages
        documents @ Rs. 2/- per page relating to noting on your present
        application either in cash or by way of Indian Postal Order or by
        Money Order or Demand Draft drawn in favour of Registrar,
        Supreme Court of India."



        Aggrieved by the failure to receive a copy of file noting appellant Shri
 Agrawal then moved an appeal before Shri M.P. Gupta, Registrar, SCI on 8-6-

                                         23

 09 with the following plea:

       "He has not mentioned of providing file notings relating to my
       letter dated 4.4.2009 addressed to Honourable Chief Justice of
       India about Additional District Judge Shri A. K. Sripal at Tis
       Hazari Courts in Delhi, as informed by the learned CPIO having
       been filed. It may be mentioned that file noting on movement of
       letter dated 4.4.2009 addressed to Honourable Chief Justice of
       India about Additional District Judge Shri A. K. Sripal at Tis
       Hazari Courts in Delhi were also specifically requested in my
       RTI petition dated5.5.2009."



       In his order of 24-6-09 appellate authority Shri M.P. Gupta Registrar
found as follows:

       "The information demanded by the appellant has already been
       supplied by the CPIO, Supreme Court of India vide impugned
       order. Accordingly I do not find any illegality in the impugned
       order and the appeal is liable to be dismissed."



       Appellant's prayer before us in his second appeal is as below:

       "*File notings on movement of RTI petition as even accepted to
       be provided by the CPIO may kindly be directed to be provided
       (for which above mentioned postal order was sent).



       *Complete file notings on movement of my letter dated 4.4.2009
       addressed to Honourable Chief Justice of India about Additional
       District Judge Shri A. K. Sripal at Tis Hazari Courts in Delhi (As
       also requested in my RTI petition) may also kindly be directed to
       be provided. (Refer CIC verdict CIC/WB/A/2008/00426 in the
       matter 'Subhash Chandra Agrawal vs. Supreme Court of India."



File No. CIC/WB/A/2009/0859
       In this case the information sought by Shri S.C. Agrawal through an
application of 6-7-2009 from CPIO, Shri Rajpal Arora, Addl. Registrar, SCI is
as follows:

       "1. Copy of complete correspondence with Honourable Chief
             Justice of India as mentioned in enclosed TOI report
             involving issue of a Union minister through his/ her lawyer
             having approached Mr. Justice R. Reghupati o madras
             High Court to influence his judicial decisions.

       2.    Name of Union Minister have tried to influence Justice R.
             Reghupati of Madras HighCourt.

       3.    Name of advocate having approached Mr. Justice R
             Reghupati on behalf of the Union Minister.

       4.    Steps taken against the referred Union Minister and the
             Advocate having tried to influence/ approach Mr. Justice
             R Reghupati for a biased decision by the Honourable
             Judge.

                                      24


         5.    Does correspondence in mentioned TOI report dated
              6.7.2009 include names of union Minister/ advocate
              having tried to influence/ approach Mr. Justice R
              Reghupati?

        6.    If not, steps take by Honourable Chief Justice of India to
              get names of referred Union Minister and his advocate
              revealed even if an unconditional apology might have
              been sought as desired by Mr. Justice R. Reghupati as pre-
              condition to hide name or referred Union Minister.

        7.    Does declining to make name of influencing Union
              Minister by a Judge of high Court Public, not encourage
              malpractices by influential ones like a Union Minister?

        8.    Steps taken by Honourable Chief Justice of India and/ or
              his office to ensure compulsory revealing of names by
              judges of person/s having tried to influence them.

        9.    Any other related information.

        10.   File notings on movement of this RTI petition as well."



        To this Shri S.C. Agrawal received a response dated 4-8-09 from CPIO,
Shri Rajpal Arora as follows:

        "I write to inform you that the information sought by you is not
        handled by and dealt with by the Registry of Supreme Court of
        India and the information relating thereto is neither maintained
        nor available in the Registry. Hence your request cannot be
        acceded to under the 
Right to Information Act, 2005
.



        You are required to send Rs. 12/- either in cash or by way of
        Indian Postal Order or by Money Order or demand Draft drawn
        in favour of Registrar, Supreme Court of India for obtaining true
        copy of noting on the movement of your present application.
        (containing six pages)."



        Aggrieved with this response appellant Shri Agrawal then moved an
appeal before Shri M.K. Gupta, Registrar, SCI on 10-8-09 with the following
plea:

 
"Since information sought relates to Honourable Chief Justice of
        Supreme Court, it should be provided by the CPIO at Supreme
        Court but now free-of-charge under 
section 7 (6)
 of RTI Act. I
        may mention that some of my RTI petitions like dated
        17.10.2005, 7.1.2009 and 5.5.2009 concerning information
        related to office of Honourable Chief Justice of India have been
        responded by the CPIO At Supreme Court. It is not understood
        how the CPIO at Supreme Court regularly changes stand on
        providing information related to Honourable Chief Justice of
        Supreme Court. Honourable Mr. Justice S. RavindraBhat of
        Delhi High court in the matter 
'Bhagat Singh vs. CIC W.P. (C )
        No.
 3114/2007)' has also held that the 
Right to Information Act

        being aright based enactment is akin to a welfare measure and
        as such should receive liberal interpretation. Present petition is
        also in accordance with esteemed verdict by full bench of

                                       25

          Honourable Central Information Commission in appeal number
         CIC/WB/A/2008/000426."


         In his order of 5-9-09 appellate authority Shri M.K. Gupta found as
follows:

         "In this regard, it is observed that learned CPIO vide impugned
         order has already informed the appellant to the effect that the
         requisite information is not handled by and dealt with by the
         Registry of Supreme Court of India and information relating
         thereto is neither maintained nor available in the registry.



         Accordingly, I do not find any merits in the appeal.'

         Appellant Shri Agrawal's prayer before us in his second appeal is as
below:

         "Central Public Information Officer may kindly be directed to
         provide sought information in my RTI petition dated 6.7.2009 in
         accordance with provisions under 
RTI Act
 in the form req7uired
         as per 
section 7 (9)
 of the RTI Act, but now free- of- charge
         under 
section 7 (6)
 of RTI Act. Action may kindly be initiated
         against concerned officer/s at Supreme Court registry under
         
section 20
 of RTI Act for declining 8information even after
         esteemed verdict dated 2.9.2009 in the matter 'CPIO, Supreme
         Court vs. Subhash Chandra Agrawal' (WP (C )288/ 2009) by
         Honourable Mr. Justice S. RavindraBhat at Delhi High Court."



File No. CIC/WB/A/2009/0408
         In this case the information sought by Shri S.C. Agrawal through an
application of 27-1-09 from CPIO, Shri Rajpal Arora, Addl. Registrar, SCI is as
follows:

         '1. What is the practical status of 'In Hou7se procedure for
               complaints against Judges' passed by all the Honourable
               Judges of Supreme court in December 1999 of which an
               official copy has already been provided to the
               undersigned by the CPIO at Supreme Court?

         2.    Number of times (mentioning details) when 'In House
               procedure' has been invoked at Supreme Court.

         3.    Was any action ever taken under 'In House procedure'
               against any Honourable Judge at Supreme Court or by
               Honourable the Chief Justice of India against some Chief
               Justice/ judge of any High Court of Supreme Court?

         4.    If yes, kindly provide details.

         5.    Has Supreme Court ever monitored implementation of
               resolution on 'In House procedure' passed at Supreme
               Court at High courts for which there were mentions in the
               resolution?

         6.    If yes, please provide any such details available a the
               Supreme Court.



                                         26


       7.     Is 'In house procedure for complaints against Judges'
             available on public domain of Supreme Court through
             website or publication for public knowledge?

      8.     If not, steps taken or intended to be taken to make public
             aware about 'In House procedure for complaints against
             judges.'

      9.     Any other related information.

      10.    Copy of file notings on removing photos of all Honourable
             Judges from outside court room of Honourable chief
             Justice as reported by Indian Express in its edition of
             20.1.2009 (copy enclosed).

      11.    Complete file notings on movement of this RTI petition."



      To this Shri Agrawal received a response dated 25-2-09 from CPIO,
Shri Rajpal Arora as follows:

      "Point Nos. 1 to 6, 8 & 9: Supreme Court, Registry does not deal
      with the matters pertaining to 'In House Procedure' and,
      therefore, CPIO of Supreme Court is not in position to provide
      the desired information.



      Point No. 7: The In House Procedure is not available on the
      website of Supreme Court and has not been published by the
      Supreme Court Registry.



      Point No. 10 : There is no file notings in the records of the
      Registry, on removing photographs of the Hon'ble Judges from
      outside the Court Room of Hon'ble Chief Justice of India.



      Point No. 11: You are required to send Rs. 8/- either in cash or
      through Indian Postal Order or Money Order or Demand Draft
      drawn in favour of Registrar, Supreme Court of India for
      obtaining copy of the notings on movement of your present
      application including copy of orders of Hon'ble the Chief Justice
      of India. (containing 4 pages @ Rs. 2/- per page)."



      Appellant Shri Agrawal then moved an appeal before Shri M.P.
Bhadran, Registrar, SCI received on 27-2-09, with the following plea:

      "Since this decision of removing photos is also not on judicial
      side of the Supreme Court, I appeal that copy of the order in this
      regard together file notings may also kindly be directed to be
      provided after collecting information/ copies of documents from
      concerned ones at Supreme Court. It is prayed accordingly."



      In his order of 24-3-2009 Shri M.P. Bhadran dismissed this appeal on
the following ground:

      "Point nos. 1 to 6, 8 and 9 deal with 'In House Procedure' for
      compliance against the Hon'ble Judges of Supreme Court.



                                      27


          CPIO has given the reply that the Supreme Court Registry is not
         dealing with the matters pertaining to 'In House Procedure' and
         therefore, CPIO is not in a position to provide the desired
         information.



         So far as the information regarding removal of photographs of
         Hon'ble Judges of the Supreme Court is concerned CPIO has
         informed the appellant that there is no file notings in the records
         of the Registry in respect of removal of photographs of Hon'ble
         Judges from outside the Court room of Hon'ble the Chief Justice
         of India. So, there is no further information to be supplied to the
         appellant by the CPIO. The true copy of file notings on point No.
         11 has already been supplied to the appellant by the CPIO
         along with the leader dated 3.3.2009. So, there is no merit in
         this appeal and it is only to be dismissed."



         Appellant Shri Agrawal's prayer before us in his second appeal is as
below:

         "Shri M. P. Bhadran's role as being First Appellate Authority is
         not proper because file notings reveal that he was an authority
         linked with CPIO's reply on the RTI petition. It is a well
         established fact that Decisive Authority cannot be Appellate
         Authority. File notings also reveal that Honourable Chief Justice
         of India also endorsed note for CPIO's reply to the RTI petition,
         thereby leaving no scope for argument that CPO of Supreme
         Court is not in a position to provide the desired information. It
         was CPIO at Supreme Court who provided me a copy of
         important resolution of 'In House Procedure'. Therefore it is but
         natural for an RTI petitioner to expect information on issues
         relating to the resolution passed by all the Honourable Judges of
         the Apex Court.



         Under the circumstances, I appeal to Honourable Central
         Information Commission to kindly direct authorities at Supreme
         Court to provide me required information to point numbers (1) to
         (6) and (8) to (9) of my RTI petition after gathering information
         from the concerned one/s at Honourable Supreme Court."



File No. CIC/WB/A/2009/0410
         In this case the information sought by Shri S.C. Agrawal through an
application of 19-1-09 from CPIO, Shri Rajpal Arora, Addl. Registrar, SCI is as
follows:

         "1. What is the status of 'Restatement of Values of Judicial
              Life' (copy enclosed) passed by all the Honourable
              Judges of Supreme Court on 7.5.1197 of which an official




                                         28

              copy has already been provided to the undersigned by
             the CPIO at Supreme Court?

      2.     Is a copy of the said resolution made available to every
             one joining as an Honourable Judge in Supreme Court?

      3.     Is sue-motto cognizance taken in respect of violation of
             any of the case in 'Restatement of Values of Judicial Life'?

      4.     Has any complaint regarding violation of any of the 16
             codes of 'Restatement of Values of Judicial Life' ever
             been made?

      5.     Steps taken in case an Honourable Judge violates any of
             the 16 codes of 'Restatement of Values of Judicial Life'.

      6.     Kindly give details of any action ever take in case of
             violation of any point of 'Restatement of Values of Judicial
             Life'.

      7.     Is 'Restatement of Values of Judicial Life' available on
             public domain of Supreme Court through website or
             publication for public knowledge?

      8.     If not, steps taken or intended to be taken to make public
             aware about 'Restatement of Values of JudicialLife'.

      9.     Referring point nine of 'Restatement of Values of Judicial
             Life', does this code also include interviews given to
             media by some Honourable Judge/s including
             Honourable Chief Justice?

      10.    Any other related information.

      11.    Copy of file notings on reach to decision to put photos of
             all Honourable Judges outside court room of Honourable
             Chief Justice as report by Indian Express in its edition of
             18.1.2009 (copy enclosed).

      12.    Complete file notings on movement of this RTI petition."



      To this Shri Agrawal received a response dated 17-2-09 from CPIO,
Shri Rajpal Arora Addl. Registrar as follows:

      "Point Nos. 1 to 6 and 8 to 8: Supreme Court Registry does not
      deal with the matters pertaining to the Resolution of Hon'ble
      Supreme Court dated 7th May 1997 on 'Restatement of Values
      of Judicial Life', and, therefore, CPIO of Supreme Court is not in
      a position to provide the desired information.
      Point No. 7: 'Restatement of Values of Judicial Life' is not
      available on Supreme Court website and has not              been
      published by the Supreme Court Registry.

      Point No. 11: The colour photographs of Hon'ble the Chief
      Justice of India and Hon'ble Judges were displayed in front of
      Court Room No. 1 vide Orders dated 10.12.2008 of Hon'ble the
      Chief Justice of India.

      You are required to send Rs. 12/- either in cash or through
      Indian Postal Order or Money Order or Demand Draft drawn in
      favour of Registrar, Supreme Court of India for obtaining copy of
      the notings on movement of your present application including
      copy of orders of Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India and copy of



                                      29

          orders dated 10.12.2008 of Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India
         (containing 6 pages @ Rs. 2/- per page)."



         Appellant Shri Agrawal then moved an appeal before Shri M.P.
Bhadran, Registrar, SCI on 26-2-09 with the following plea:

         "There is no logic in CPIO expressing inability to provide the
         required information without making any effort to compile the
         same. I, therefore, appeal that the learned CPIO may kindly be
         directed to provide me required information to point numbers 1
         to 6 and 8 to 10 of my RTI petition after gathering information
         from the concerned one/s at Honourable Supreme Court."



         In his order of 18-3-2009 appellate authority Shri M.P. Bhadran
dismissed this appeal on the following ground:

         "I find no reason to disagree with the reply given by the CPIO
         that since Supreme Court Registry does not deal with the
         matters pertaining to the Resolution, CPIO is not in a position to
         provide the desired information. That apart the information
         sought by the appellant on points 1to 6 and 8 to 10 does not
         come within the ambit of 
Sections 2(F)
 and (j) of the 
Right to
         Information Act
. I find no merit in this appeal and it is only to be
         dismissed."



         Appellant Shri Agrawal's prayer before us in his second appeal is as
below:

         "Shri M. P. Bhadran's role as being First Appellate Authority is
         not proper because file notings reveal that he was an authority
         linked with CPIO's reply on the RTI petition. It is a well
         established fact that Decisive Authority cannot be Appellate
         Authority. File notings also reveal that Honourable Chief Justice
         of India also endorsed note for CPIO's reply to the RTI petition,
         thereby leaving no scope for argument that CPIO of Supreme
         Court is not in a position to provide the desired information. It
         was CPIO at Supreme Court who provided me a copy of
         important resolution of 'Restatement of Values of Judicial Life'.
         Therefore, it is but natural for an RTI petitioner to expect
         information on issues relating to the resolution passed by all the
         22 Honourable judges of the Apex Court."



File No. CIC/WB/A/2009/0411
         In this case Shri S.C. Agrawal's request before the CPIO, Shri Rajpal
Arora, Addl. Registrar, SCI was for "information together with relevant
documents/ file notings, if any, on action taken on my letter dated 8.9.2008
addressed to Honourable Chief Justice of India Mr. Justice K. G.
BalakrishananJi (copy of letter enclosed). In case, my said letter dated



                                         30

 8.9.2008 is forwarded/ transferred to some other authority, kindly transfer this
RTI petition to the CPIO there. Kindly attach file notings including those on
movement of this RTI petition."



         To this Shri Agrawal received a response dated 6-2-09 from CPIO, Shri
Rajpal Arora as follows:

         "I write to say that your letter dated 8.9.2008 was placed before
         Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India on 10.9.2008 and as directed
         by Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India the same was filed.



         Further, you are required to send RS. 4/- for obtaining two
         pages documents @ Rs. 2/- per page relating to noting on your
         present application either in cash or Indian Postal Order or
         Money Order or Demand Draft drawn in favour of Registrar,
         Supreme Court of India."



         Appellant Shri Agrawal then moved an appeal before Shri M.P.
Bhadran, Registrar, SCI on 18.2.2009 with the following plea:

         "But it seems that two page of file-notings on movement of my
         RTI Petition are not complete with copy of draft reply and
         approval of draft reply by concerned ones not enclosed. Also,
         file notings relating to my letter dated 8.9.2008 addressed to
         Honourable Chief Justice of India Mr. Justice K. G.
         BalakrishananJi being filed are not enclosed even though all
         these were specifically requested in my RTI petition dated
         7.1.2009."



         In his order of 16-3-09 Shri M.P. Bhadran dismissed this appeal as
information already provided as follows:

         "It is pertinent to note the request made by the appellant as per
         his application dated 7.1.2009. As per application dated
         7.1.2009 the appellant has made a request o provide him
         information together with relevant documents/ file noting, if any,
         on action taken on his letter dated 8.9.08 addressed to Hon'ble
         the CJI including file notings on movement of RTI petition. CPIO
         has already furnished the true copy of the file noting along with
         letter dated 14.2.2009. The file noting itself is self explanatory
         and there is no further information to be supplied by the CPIO. I
         find no merit in this appeal and it is only to be dismissed.'

         Appellant Shri Agrawal's prayer before us in his second appeal is as
below:

 
"I appeal to Honourable Central Information Commission to
         kindly direct CPIO at Supreme Court to provide me complete file
         notings (1) on action taken on my letter dated 8.9.2008



                                        31

        addressed to Honourable Chief Justice of India Mr. Justice K. G.
       BalakrishananJi and (2) complete file notings on movement of
       RTI petition dated 7.1.2009 including also copy of draft reply and
       approval of draft reply on my RTI petition by concerned ones,
       buy now without any additional cost because I have already
       once paid the copy charges as per CPIO's demand. I had to
       unnecessarily bear fast in filing subsequent appeals because of
       insufficient and incomplete file notings provided by the CPOIO.
       Honourable Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhatt of Delhi High court in
       the matter "
Bhagat Singh vs. CIC (W. P. (C ) No.
 3114/ 2007)
       has also held that the 
Right to Information Act
 being aright
       based enactment is akin to a welfare measure and as such
       should receive liberal interpretation. It is prayed accordingly.'

File No. CIC/WB/A/2009/0530
       In this case the information sought by Shri S.C. Agrawal through an
application of 16-2-09 from CPIO, Shri Rajpal Arora, Addl. Registrar, SCI is as
follows:


       "Complete detail of complaints received against judges of
       Supreme Court and High courts received at supreme Court or
       by Honourable the Chief Justice of India from 1.10.2005 till date.
       Please also mention action taken by Supreme Court or by
       Honourable the Chief Justice on each of the complaint. Please
       also include file notings on every complaint, and also on
       movement of this RTI petition."



       To this Shri Agrawal received a response dated 7-3-09 from CPIO, Shri
Rajpal Arora as follows:

       "I write to inform you that the complaints against Hon'ble Judges
       of the High Court or Supreme Court are not handled by the
       Registry. The complaints, if any, received in Supreme Court
       Registry against the Hon'ble Judges of the High Court or
       Supreme Court are sent to the office of Hon'ble the Chief Justice
       of India and details of such complaints are not maintained by the
       Registry. Since, such information is not held by or under the
       control of the Registry the CPIO, Supreme Court of India cannot
       accede to your request under the 
Right to Information Act, 2005
.



       You are required to send Rs. 8/- either in cash or through Indian
       Postal Order or Demand Draft drawn in favour of Registrar,
       Supreme Court of India for obtaining copy of the noting on
       movement of your present application including copy of orders
       of Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India on your application
       (containing 4 pages @ Rs. 2/- perpage)."



       Not satisfied, appellant Shri Agrawal then moved an appeal before Shri
M.P. Bhadran, Registrar, SCI on 16.3.2009 with the following plea:



                                      32


          "The learned CPIO vide Dy. No. 741/RTI/08-09/2008 dated
         7.3.2009 expressed inability to provide information because
         according to him all such complaints are handled by Honourable
         the Chief Justice of India. Interestingly, the reply also indicates
         that there is some order from Honourable the Chief Justice of
         India on my this RTI application clearly establishing that office of
         Honourable the Chief Justice of India is approachable by the
         learned CPIO together required information as sought in my RTI
         petition. Otherwise also there is no logic in CPIO's reply of
         terming Chief Justice of India and Supreme Court of India as
         authorities not related with each other. I appeal that the learned
         CPIO may kindly be directed to provide required information as
         sought in my RTI petition after gathering the same from office of
         Honourable the Chief Justice of India.'

         In his order of 8-4-2009 Shri M.P. Bhadran dismissed this appeal on
the following ground:

         "The request of the appellant is to direct the CPIO to furnish the
         information sought by him after gathering the same from the
         office of Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India. I find no reason to
         disagree with the reply given by the CPIO. No information is
         held by the Registry and CPIO is not in a position to furnish the
         information sought by the appellant. There is no merit in this
         appeal and it is only to be dismissed."



         Appellant Shri Agrawal's prayer before us in his second appeal is as
below:

         "I appeal that authorities at Supreme Court may kindly be
         directed to provide complete details of complaints against
         judges of Supreme Court and High courts received at Supreme
         court or by Honourable the Chief justice of India from 1.1.2005
         till date including action taken by Supreme Court or by
         Honourable the Chief Justice of India on each of the complaint
         together with file notings on every complaint. Any other relief
         deemed fit in favour of the petition, may kindly be allowed."



         Vide our letter of September 8, 2009 we had issued notice for hearing
of appeal
 u/s 19
 of the RTI Act of the following seven appeal petitions:

         "CIC/WB/A/2009/000001
         CIC/WB/A/2009/000408
         CIC/WB/A/2009/000410
         CIC/WB/A/2009/000411
         CIC/WB/A/2009/000529
         CIC/WB/A/2009/000530
         CIC/WB/A/2009/000735"



                                         33


       These were scheduled for hearing on 9th October, 2009. The hearings
were further scheduled for 6th November, 2009 vide our letter of 6-10-09.
However, on the very same day we had received a fax from Shri R.P. Arora,
CPIO, SCI seeking adjournment as follows:

      "I am directed to say that as we have filed appeal in the Delhi
      High Court against the judgment of the Learned Single Judge
      dated 2nd September, 2009 in Writ Petition No. 288 of 2009, it is
      requested to kindly adjourn all the above eight matters till the
      final disposal of the said appeal."



      We then received a further request from CPIO Shri R.P. Arora of SCI of
October 22, 2009 submitting as follows:

      "I am directed to say that as Letters Patent Appeal No. 501 of
      2009 has been filed against the judgment of the Learned Single
      Judge dated 2nd September, 2009 in Writ Petition No. 288 of
      2009 which is listed for final hearing before a larger Bench of
      three Hon'ble Judges in the Delhi High Court on 13th and 13th
      November, 2009 and the said matters are being listed upon
      giving reference of the Judgment in W. P. No. 288 of 2009 in his
      appeal to the Central Information Commission as mentioned in
      the earlier letter of even number dated 6.10.2009 of the
      undersigned, it is requested to kindly further adjourn all the
      above eight matters till the final disposal of the said appeal."



      Upon this we have received a e-mail dt. 27-10-09 from appellant
referring to the adjournment request of CPIO, SCI a copy of which had been
endorsed to him also raising the following points:

      "Reasoning by CPIO at Supreme Court raises several law-points
      and aspects:

      1. Can simply filing of an appeal (that too without getting any
         stay-order) in a case involving CIC verdict put complete 
RTI
         Act
 on hold?

      2. Is filing an appeal at Division Bench against single-bench
         verdict equivalent to a refused stay-order by the higher
         bench.?

      3. Can simply a mention of a writ-petition (288/2009) in a
         petition (CIC/WB/A/2008/000859) put all the eight petitions on
         hold indefinitely especially also when this mention of the writ-

         petition is only in one petition (CIC/WB/A/2008/000859) for
         which a separate notice for hearing is issued while combined
         notice for hearing for other seven petitions is different.

      4. A division Bench of Honourable Supreme Court observed
          against adjournment-culture by mention that many a times
          petitioners seek stay-orders on filing a writ/ appeal, and drag
          the case for years with many a times ultimately losing the
          case even.



                                      34


       5. Central Information Commission has an admirable practice is
         not entertaining adjournment requests in otherwise has
         become a culture in our courts for which concern is being
         expressed by even those in judicial system.

 
6. Central Information Commission usually proceeds with
         hearing overlooking adjournment requests like was done in
         petition number CIC/AT/A/2008/736 in the matter (
Subhash
         Chandra Agrawal vs. Department of Justice
)."




      Therefore, through our letter of 28-10-09 addressed to the CPIO, SCI
they were informed that the request for adjournment has not been acceded to
in view of an objection raised by the appellant Shri S.C. Agrawal.
Subsequently, through a letter of 28-10-09 no copy of which was endorsed to
respondent, Shri S.C. Agrawal has submitted as follows:

      1. Can simply filing of an appeal (that too without getting any
         stay-order) in a case involving CIC verdict put complete 
RTI
         Act
 on hold?

      2. Is filing an appeal at Division Bench against single-bench
         verdict equivalent to a refused stay-order by the higher
         bench.?

      3. Can simply a mention of a writ-petition (288/2009) in a
         petition (CIC/WB/A/2008/000859) put all the eight petitions
         on hold indefinitely especially also when this mention of the
         writ-petition is only in one petition (CIC/WB/A/2008/000859)
         for which a separate notice for hearing is issued while
         combined notice for hearing for other seven petitions is
         different.

      4. A division Bench of Honourable Supreme Court observed
         against adjournment-culture by mention that many a times
         petitioners seek stay-orders on filing a writ/ appeal, and drag
         the case for years with many a times ultimately losing the
         case even.

      5. Central Information Commission has an admirable practice is
         not entertaining adjournment requests in otherwise has
         become a culture in our courts for which concern is being
         expressed by even those in judicial system.

 
6. Central Information Commission usually proceeds with
         hearing overlooking adjournment requests like was done in
         petition number CIC/AT/A/2008/736 in the matter (
Subhash
         Chandra Agrawal vs. Department of Justice
).


      7. There are several issues of national importance in these
         petitions fixed for hearing, which may lose relevance if
         hearing is postponed."



      The appeal was then heard on 6-11-09. The following are present:



                                     35


       Appellants
            Shri Subhash Agrawal.

            Shri PrashantBhushan, Advocate
            Shri Pranav Sachdeva, Advocate

      Respondents
           Shri Rajpal Arora, CPIO, Supreme Court.

           Shri Amit Anand Tiwari, Advocate, CPIO, Supreme Court.
           Shri Devdutt Kamal, Advocate.



      Shri Amit Anand Tiwari, Learned Counsel for respondent submitted
that the two issues on which the Letter Patent Appeal (LPA) has been filed
against the judgment of the Ld. Single Judge of 2-9-09 in W.P. No. 288/2009
focuses on the following two issues:

      (i)        Whether information held by the CJI can be disclosed by the
                 CPIO and deemed to be held by the CPIO under the
                 definition of "Right to Information" u/s 2(j).

      (ii)       Whether the information held by the CJI has to be deemed to
                 be in the public domain.



      Both issues were strongly disputed by Learned counsel for appellant
Shri Prashant Bhushan but submitted that the matter of whether the CJI is a
public authority or not has been settled both at the level of Central Information
Commission and at the level of Delhi High Court. This is not an issue that is
being agitated in the LPA. He went on the describe the issue described by Ld.
Counsel for respondent at (ii) above as absurd and a complete negation of the

RTI Act
. Ld. Counsel Shri Prashant Bhushan also submitted that should the
decision in the LPA go against the CJI would this then be agitated in the
Supreme Court and thereby debar all decisions under the 
RTI Act
 from
disclosure by the CJI till that appeal keeps pending.



      In our view the issue here is much simpler. Ld. Counsel for respondent
has specifically pleaded that since the LPA No. 501/2009 had been listed for
final hearing before a larger Bench of three Judges on 12th and 13th
November, 2009 a decision at this stage could lead to further litigation
involving public expenditure and inconvenience to all stakeholders. In this
context he submitted a copy of the Order of the Division Bench of the High
Court of Delhi of 7-10-09 in which the request for stay has not been pressed



                                        36

 and hence the application dismissed. However, to substantiate                his
contentions of the point above he highlighted the following from the synopsis
and list of dates of LPA No. 501/09, which are as follows:

      "Because the Learned Single Judge failed to appreciate that the
      'information' regarding the declaration of assets by the Hon'ble
      Judges of the Supreme court sought for by the Respondent No.
      1 was not covered under the Act and the Respondent had no
      'right' to seek such information under 
Section 2 (j)
 of the Act.



       Because the Learned Single Judge omitted to consider the
      specific contention of the appellant that information accessible
      under the Act has to be information in the 'public domain."



      Having taken into account the above arguments we were of the view
that the position of this Commission has already been explicitly stated on the
two issues agitated in the LPA. A decision of the DB of the High Court will
help further delineate contours of the 
RTI Act
 2005. It would, therefore, be
wise to allow for a short adjournment to enable the learned justices of the
High Court of Delhi, which include the Chief Justice to deliberate and
pronounce on these issues. If the decision of the Delhi High Court upholds
the stand of the Commission in this regard, all these appeals would
automatically stand resolved. The hearing was therefore, adjourned to
Monday the 16th day of November, 2009 at 4.00 p.m. which was further
postponed to 20th November, 09. The matter was then again heard on 20-11-
2009. The following are present.

      Appellants
      Shri Mayank Mishra, Advocate
      Shri Subhash Agrawal.

      Shri Pranav Sachdeva, Advocate

      Respondents
      Shri Rajpal Arora, CPIO, Supreme Court.

      Shri DevaduttKamat, Advocate.

      Ms. PriyankaTelang, Advocate.

      Shri NitinLonkar, Advocate.



      It was reported that the hearing scheduled by the Division Bench of the
High Court of Delhi has indeed been held but judgment had been reserved.
Learned counsel for appellant Shri Mayank Mishra submitted that the only
issue pending before the Full Bench is the question of in-house procedure.



                                      37


 The issue of the jurisdiction of the RTI being comprehensive and hence
including the office of Chief Justice of India stands conceded. Learned
counsel for respondents Shri Devadatt Kamat submitted that he is not denying
that the Chief Justice of India is a public authority. Nevertheless it is his case
that information of a certain kind is not information open to access in the
definition of Right to Information provided in 
Section 2 (j)
 even though, it may
come under the broader definition of information
 u/s 2 (f)
. The appeals were,
therefore, looked at from the above points of view.



       In these cases it is conceded by appellant that the information sought
in   file     Nos.     CIC/WB/A/2009/00408,           CIC/WB/A/2009/00410    and
CIC/WB/A/2009/00530 all relate to in-house procedure, which is the
information the disclosability of which under the RTI is the pointed issue
pending a decision before the High Court. Therefore, hearing in all these three
cases requires to be adjourned.



       In     file   Nos.   CIC/WB/A/2009/001,        CIC/WB/A/2009/00411     and
CIC/WB/A/2009/00735 the information sought and held by the SCI has been
provided except the file noting. CPIO Shri Rajpal Arora, Addl. Registrar
submitted that in these cases there is no file noting and the information sought
by appellant has, in fact, been provided to the extent that it is held by the
office of Supreme Court including the office of Chief Justice of India.



       In file No. CIC/WB/A/2009/00529 Shri DevadattKamat submitted that
the information sought in this case cannot be disclosed in light of 
Article 74
 of
the Constitution read with 
section 2 (j)
 and indeed the exemption provided
from disclosure under 
Sections 8 (1) (e)
 and (j). In this matter, however,
learned counsel for appellant Shri Mayank Mishra submitted that this issue
had been repeatedly discussed in the Full Bench which is of the Central
Information      Commission,   namely,    in   File    Nos.   CIC/WB/A/2008/208,
CIC/WB/A/2008/00426 and CIC/AT/A/2008/00736 in which the Commission
has repeatedly taken the decision that such information is disclosable. To
allow time to learned counsel for respondent Shri Devadatt Kamat to further
develop his arguments for which he was not fully prepared in the present



                                         38

 hearing, the hearing in this case is adjourned to 23rd November, 2009 at 5.00
p.m.


        This then leaves only file No. .CIC/WB/A/2009/00859 as being open to
a decision in this hearing. In this file the plea of learned counsel for
respondent Shri D.D. Kamat is that the information sought cannot be deemed
to be not 'held' or 'under the control' of the SCI. He also submitted that the
information sought is part of in-house procedure of the office of Chief Justice
of India. To be considered as "held" or "under the control" of the Supreme
Court of India, these words have to be interpreted in terms of the basic
structure of the Indian Constitution. In this context he invited our attention to
the following ruling from the decision of the Supreme Court in N. Kannadasan
vs. AjoyKhose (2009) 7 SCC as follows:

         "71. Independence and impartiality of judiciary is a basic
        feature of the Constitution. Constitutionalism envisages that all
        laws including the constitutional provisions should be interpreted
        so as to uphold the basic feature of the Constitution."



 
Shri DevadattKamat has gone on to quote from a judgment of the
Supreme        Court   in   
Velamuri       Venkata   Sivaprasad        Vs.   Kothuri
Venkateswarlu
 (2000) 2 SCC which deals with 
Hindu Succession Act
 1956,
in particular 
Section 14
, as follows:


         "The legislation of 1956, therefore, ought to receive an
        interpretation which would be in consonance with the wishes
        and desires of the framers of our Constitution. We ourselves
        have given this Constitution to us and as such it is a bounden
        duty and an obligation to honour the mandate of the Constitution
        in very sphere and interpretation which would go in consonance
        therewith ought to be had without any departure therefrom."



        In this context he argued that under the Constitution, the Judges are to
be     given    an     exalted   status.    He    has,   therefore,     quoted    C.
RavichandranIyerVs.         Justice     A.M.     Bhattacharjee    in     which    K.
Ramaswamy. J. has ruled on why rule of law and judicial independence
needs to be preserved:

        "The diverse contentions give rise to the question whether
        any Bar Council or Bar Association has the right to pass
        resolution against the conduct of a Judge perceived to have
        committed misbehaviour and, if so, what is its effect on
        independence of the judiciary. With a view to appreciate the
        contentions in their proper perspective, it is necessary to haveat

                                        39

       the back of our mind the importance of the independence of
      the judiciary. In a democracy governed by rule of law         under
      written Constitution, judiciary issentinelon      thequi vive      to
      protect the fundamental rights and to poise even scales of
      justice between the citizens and the State or the States inter se.
      Rule of law and judicial review are      basic features of the
      Constitution.     As its integral     constitutional      structure,
      independence of the judiciary is an essential attribute of rule of
      law. 
In 
S.P. Gupta vs. Union of India
 [(1981) Supp. SCC 87] in
      paragraph27,this      Court held that if there is one principle
      which runs through the entire fabric of the Constitution it is the
      principle of the rule of law, and under the Constitution it is the
      judiciary which is entrusted with the task of keeping every organ
      of the State within the limits of the law and thereby making the
      rule of law meaningful and effective. Judicial review is one of
      the     most potent      weapons in the armoury of       law. The
      judiciary seeks to protect the citizen against violation of his
      constitutional or legal rights or misuse or abuse of power by the
      State or its officers. The judiciary stands between the citizen
      and the State as a bulwark against executive excesses and
      misuse or abuse of power by        the executive. It is, therefore,
      absolutely essential that the judiciary must be free from
      executive pressure or influence which has been secured by
      making elaborate provisions in the Constitution with details. The
      independence of judiciary is not           limited only to the
      independence from the executive pressure or influence; it is a
      wider concept, which takes within its sweep independence from
      any other pressure and prejudices. It has many
      dimensions, viz. fearlessness       of other power          centres,
      economic or political, and freedom from prejudices acquired
      and nourished by the class to which the judges belong."




 
He has, therefore, concluded with the words of K. Ramaswamy J. 
in

the above case
, which are as follows:


      The arch of the Constitution of India pregnant from its Preamble,
      Chapter III [Fundamental Rights] and Chapter IV [Directive
      Principles] is to establish an egalitarian social order
      guaranteeing fundamental freedoms and to secure justice -
      social, economic and political - to every citizen through rule of
      law. Existing social inequalities need to be removed and
      equality in fact is accorded to all people irrespective of caste,
      creed, sex, religion or region subject to               protective
      discrimination only through rule of law. The Judge cannot
      retain his earlier passive judicial rule when he administers the
      law under the Constitution to give effect to the constitutional
      ideals. The extraordinary complexity of modern litigation
      requires him not merely to declare the rights of citizens but also
      to mould the relief warranted under given facts and
      circumstances and often command the executive and other



                                        40

          agencies to enforce and give effect to         the order, writ  or
         direction or prohibit them to do unconstitutional    acts. In this
         ongoing complex of adjudicatory process, the role of the Judge
         is not merely to interpret the law but also to lay new norms of
         law and to mould the law to suit the changing social and
         economic scenario to        make the ideals enshrined in the
         Constitution meaningful and reality. Therefore, the Judge is
         required to take judicial notice of the social     and economic
         ramification, consistent with the theory of    law. Thereby, the
         society demands active judicial roles, which formerly were
         considered exceptional but now a routine. The Judge must act
         independently, if he is to perform the functions as expected of
         him and he must feel secure that such action of him will not
         lead to his own downfall. The independence is not assured for
         the Judge but to the judged. Independence to the Judge,
         therefore, would be both essential and proper. Considered
         judgment of the court would guarantee the Constitutional
         liberties which would thrive only in an atmosphere of judicial
         independence. Every endeavour should be made to preserve
         independent judiciary as a citadel of public justice      and
         public security to fulfil the constitutional role assigned to the
         Judges."



         Learned counsel Shri Devadatt Kamat has then quoted from
Shri P. RamanathaAiyar's Advanced Law Lexicon Volume II to define the
word "held" as follows:

         "The word 'held' connotes the existence of a right or title in the
         hold. PhekuChamar v. Harish Chandra, AIR 1953 ALL 406, 407,
         KailashRai v. jai Jai Ram, AIR 1973 SC 893, 897. (UP Zamindari
         Abolition and Land Reforms Act (1 of 1951),
S.9
).



         "The word 'held' means lawfully held, to possesses by legal title,"

         Budhan Singh v. BabiBux, AIR 1970 SC 1880 at 1884."



         Shri DevadattKamat has also quoted from Volume 1 of the Advanced
Law Lexicon on the word "control" as below:

 
"The expression 'control' connotes power to issue directions
         regarding how a thing may be done by a superior authority to an
         inferior authority. 
K. S. Ramamurthy Reddiar vs. Chief
         Commissioner, Pondicherry
, AIR 1963 SC 1464."




         In support he has invited our attention to KailashRai vs. Jai Jai Ram
(1973)     1    SCC     announced     on      22nd   January,   1973    in     which
Hon'bleVaidialingam, J. has held as below:



                                         41


        "In interpreting expression, this Court in Budhan Singh and Another
       v. NabiBux and Another has held that it means lawfully held. This
       Court has further observed that:



       'According to Webster's New Twentieth Century Dictionary the
       word 'held' is technically understood to mean to possess by legal
       title. Therefore, by interpreting the word 'held' as 'lawfully held'
       there was no addition of any word to the section. According to the
       words of 
Section 9
 and in the context of the scheme of the Act, it is
       proper to construe the word 'held' in the section as 'lawfullyheld'."



       In brief, therefore, the argument of learned counsel for respondent has
been that the information sought in all these matters cannot be deemed either
to be held or under the control of Chief Justice in legal terms. Learned
counsel for appellant Shri Mayank Mishra has, on the other hand, submitted
that what appellant Shri S.C. Agrawal has sought is not concerning the
conduct of Justices of the High Court but that of the Union Minister against
whose attempt to influence Hon'ble Mr. Justice Reghupati has made
complaint. He, however, conceded that the questions 7 and 8 are concerned
with the conduct of Justices.



                                DECISION NOTICE

       As discussed above there are no file notings as sought in file Nos.
CIC/WB/A/2009/0001,       CIC/WB/A/2009/0411       and    CIC/WB/A/2009/0735,
hence the information sought is that already provided by CPIO Shri Rajpal
Arora being the information held by the SCI. These three appeals are
therefore, dismissed.



 
On the other hand the issue in Appeal Nos. CIC/WB/A/2009/0408,
CIC/WB/A/2009/0410 and CIC/WB/A/2009/0530 concerns disclosure of
information of in-house functioning of the office of the CJI, which is the subject
of appeal before the Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi. For this
reason any decision in these three cases at this stage could be singularly
inappropriate and the hearing is adjourned to 16th December, 2009 at 4.00
p.m.





                                       42

           With regard to the appeal No. CIC/WB/A/2009/00859 ,however, we are
not convinced that the disclosure of information sought by.appellant Shri
S.C. Agrawal would in any way infringe on the constitutional stature of Hon'ble
Justices of the High Court or indeed in any way diminish the exalted status
that we readily concede is granted to him in a democracy such as ours. The
implication in this appeal is that, in fact, there has been an attempt to diminish
that exalted status by unseemly pressure and the information sought is a
means to expose such an unworthy attempt, if any. Besides, the argument
constructed so painstakingly by learned counsel for respondent Shri
DevadattKamat to substantiate his plea that information sought cannot be
deemed to be held or under the control of the SCI has also failed to convince
because the different rulings marshalled by learned counsel referred
repeatedly to matters of property and property records, not questions of
general correspondence which would constitute general information. Should
the plea of learned counsel Shri DevadattKamat be accepted such a decision
would have devastating effect on the very foundation of the principles of
transparency and accountability of which the 
Right to Information Act
 2005
rests firm. Learned counsel seems to have made an effort to make a
distinction between the definitions of information as clearly mandated
 u/s 2 (f)

and the Right to Information defined in 
Section 2 (j)
. On this specific issue,
however, we have the decision of the Delhi High Court in WP (C) 7265/2007

Poorna Prajna Public School vs. Central Information Commissioner
&Ors.
 decided on 25.9.'09 in which Hon'ble Shri Sanjeev Khanna J. has
examined this very issue and come to the conclusion that there can be no
such fine dividing line. "It is well established" the learned Justice has held,
"that an interpretation which renders another provision or part thereof
redundant or superfluous should be avoided."1 Under the circumstances this
appeal is allowed. The information sought by appellant Shri S.C. Agrawal in
respect of all questions except question Nos. 7 and 8 which are indeed
questions on in-house procedure apart from questioning the conduct of
Justices of the High Court in which, in our view, a response could impinge
upon the exalted status granted to such Justices, will now be provided to



1


    Para 8 of WP© No. 7625/2007


                                       43

  appellant Shri S.C. Agrawal within 15 working days of the date of receipt of this
 decision notice. There will be no costs.




        Announced in the hearing in respect of all files save File No.
 CIC/WB/A/2009/00859. The Decision on the latter is announced in open
 chamber this 24th day of November 2009. Notice of this decision be given free of
 cost to the parties.



 (Wajahat Habibullah)
 Chief Information Commissioner
 24-11-2009

 Authenticated true copy. Additional copies of orders shall be supplied against
 application and payment of the charges prescribed under the Act to the CPIO of
 this Commission.



(Pankaj K.P. Shreyaskar)
Joint Registrar
24-11-2009

ADJUNCT ORDER: Appeal No. CICWB/A/2009/000529 and CIC/WB/A/2009/000859

Date of Hearing: 10.08.2020

Note: Aggrieved due to non-compliance of the decisions of the Commission in
CIC/WB/A/2009/000529 dated 29.04.2009 and CIC/WB/A/2009/000859 dated 06.07.2009
despite the orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Civil Appeal No 10044 and
10045 of 2009 dated 13.11.2019, the Appellant made an application for non-compliance
dated 01.06.2020. In the said representation, the Appellant also requested to take the four
adjourned cases in File No CIC/WB/A/2009/000529, CIC/WB/A/2009/000408,
CIC/WB/A/2009/000410 and CIC/WB/A/2009/000530 in view of the decision of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Civil Appeal No 10045 of 2009 dated 13.11.2019.
However, subsequently, the Appellant vide email dated 23.07.2020 informed the
Commission that inadvertently in his submission dated 01.06.2020, dates of CIC decisions
were wrongly given as appeal date and RTI application date respectively. He therefore
requested correction of the dates as CIC decision dated 24.11.2009 in File No
CIC/WB/A/2009/000529 and 20/24.11.2009 in File No CIC/WB/A/2009/000859. The
Commission was also in receipt of a written submission from the Appellant dated
16.07.2020 wherein he inter alia made a request to issue notices for hearing of each case
separately.

 HEARING:

Facts emerging during the hearing:

The following were present:

Appellant: Shri S.C.Agrawal through TC;

Respondent: Mr.AjayAgrawal, Addl. Reg. & CPIO, Mr. Bharat Singh, Advocate and
Mr. Saurabh Mishra, Advocate;



Being a very old matter, the documents pertaining to the instant cases were not readily
available on the record of the Commission. The In-charge record room, CIC vide letter
dated    10.06.2020      also   conveyed     that    file   nos     CIC/WB/A/2009/00530,
CIC/WB/A/2009/0408, CIC/WB/A/2009/00410 and CIC/WB/A/2009/00529 were not
available in the record room. However, file no CIC/WB/A/2009/00859 was available in the
E-book of Appscom software. Thus, in the interest of natural justice, the facts were culled
out from the available records, earlier orders of the Commission and written submissions
made by both the parties and in the interest of natural justice, opportunity of hearing was
granted to both the parties.



The Appellant re-iterated the contents of his non-compliance application and written
submissions furnished before the Commission and stated that the direction of the Apex
Court in both the matters to re-examine the matter after following the procedure
 u/s 11 (1)

of the RTI Act, 2005 was not complied within the time frame stipulated under 
Section 11
 of
the RTI Act, 2005. While submitting that notices to third parties
 u/s 11
 of the Act ought to
have been issued within five days and opportunity of representation be given to them within
10 date from the date of receipt of such notice, the Appellant submitted that the CPIO
should have decided disclosure of information within 45 days of the Supreme Court Order
i.e. by 28.12.2019. The Appellant acknowledged the receipt of the replies dated 22.06.2020
(Appeal       No      CICWB/A/2009/000529)           and     20.06.2020        (Appeal     No.
CIC/WB/A/2009/000859) sent by the CPIO in compliance to the directions of the Apex
Court dated 13.11.2019 as also the receipt of the written submissions sent by the
Respondent prior to the instant hearing before the Commission. While expressing his partial
satisfaction with the point wise response provided vide letter 20.06.2020 (Appeal No.
CIC/WB/A/2009/000859), the Appellant submitted that queries 04 and 08 were not
answered to his satisfaction and that with regard to the information sought in Appeal No
CICWB/A/2009/000529, the information was incorrectly denied on the ground that the
consent of the third parties was not received. Explaining that the issues raised by him were
in the larger public interest, the Appellant also prayed before the Commission to advise and
sensitize the Respondent (CPIO) to comply with the directions issued by the Apex Court as
also the provisions of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 in letter and spirit. In its reply, the Respondent re-

iterated the response of the CPIO dated 22.06.2020 (Appeal No CICWB/A/2009/000529)
and 22.06.2020 (Appeal No. CIC/WB/A/2009/000859) issued in compliance with the
parameters 
laid down by
 the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its decision dated 13.11.2019 and
submitted that point wise information was already provided to the Appellant vide letter
dated 20.06.2020 in Appeal No CIC/WB/A/2009/000859 which answered all the queries
raised by the Appellant. However, in Appeal No CICWB/A/2009/000529, since the consent
was not received from the Third Parties as per 
Section 11
 of the RTI Act, 2005 a detailed
and reasoned response was provided to the Appellant while referring to the principles 
laid
down by
 the Hon'ble Supreme Court in para 36, 43, 59, 34, 76 and 88 of its judgement in
Civil Appeal No 10044/2010 dated 13.11.2019. However, the extract of the decision of the
Collegium meeting held on 15.10.2008 and 17.11.2008 and copies of the movement of file
 notings on movement of RTI application dated 23.01.2009 as admissible after severing
information
 u/s 10
 of the RTI Act, 2005 was provided to the Appellant. As regards the delay
in complying with the directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, it was stated that the same
was unintentional and not malafide and had occurred due to the procedural knitty gritties/
correspondences involved in seeking the consent of the third parties. During the hearing the
Respondent also made a reference to the order dated 23.03.2020 issued by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Suo Motu Writ Petition (Civil) No (s) 3/2020 wherein it was decided
that "To obviate such difficulties and to ensure that lawyers/litigants do not have to come
physically to file such proceedings in respective Courts/Tribunals across the country
including this Court, it is hereby ordered that a period of limitation in all such proceedings,
irrespective of the limitation prescribed under the general law or Special Laws whether
condonable or not shall stand extended w.e.f. 15th March 2020 till further order/s to be
passed by this Court in present proceedings."



On being queried whether prior to approaching the Commission, he had filed a First Appeal

u/s 19 (1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 against the decision of the CPIO issued in compliance with
the decision of the Apex Court dated 13.11.2019, the Appellant admitted that he had filed
the first appeals on 11.07.2020 i.e., subsequent to approaching the Commission vide
representation dated 01.06.2020. The Appellant however submitted that his First Appeals
were not decided by the FAA till date although he had received the notice for scheduling
hearing on 26.08.2020 in Appeal No CIC/WB/A/2009/000859. Explaining that the First
Appeal could have been heard through the video conference mode, the Appellant submitted
that a decision in the instant matters could be pronounced by the Commission since
remanding the matter to the FAA could result in further delay in the matter and that justice
delayed was justice denied.



The Commission was in receipt of a written submission from the Appellant dated
24.07.2020 (Appeal No. CIC/WB/A/2009/000529)wherein while referring to the RTI
application dated 23.01.2009, the Appellant stated that the CPIO vide letter dated
22.06.2020 subsequent to his two separate submissions dated 01.06.2020 addressed to the
Hon'ble Chief Justice of India and the Commission declined information as according to
him there will be no public interest in divulging / sharing such information. However
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ranjan Gogoi (since retired) who headed the Constitution Bench as the
Chief Justice giving the verdict dated 13.11.2019 in a series of TV interviews in March
2020 repeatedly advised filing RTI applications about the suitability of Mr. Justice AP Shah
(Retired) as the Supreme Court Judge. Therefore this evidently becomes a case of public
interest as deemed fit by none other than the then Chief Justice of India giving the verdict
subsequent to which the CPIO responded. While referring to the resolution dated
03.10.2017 by the five senior most Hon'ble Judges of Supreme Court at that time, the
Appellant submitted that the resolution clearly indicated that lately Hon'ble Judges of the
Supreme Court have considered putting collegiums proceedings about appointment and
elevation of judges in higher courts in public domain evidently because of "public interest"

involved and the practice has thereafter been started with all such collegiums proceedings
on appointment and promotion of judges in higher courts now available on Supreme Court
website. Thus, the Appellant submitted that if putting later collegiums proceedings was
considered proper by the Hon'ble judges of the Supreme Court then the same must hold
 good for earlier collegiums proceedings before passing of the said resolution including the
one relating to the RTI application presently under consideration. Thus, the Appellant
prayed to direct the CPIO to provide the information as directed by the Commission vide
verdict dated 24.11.2009 as it is a case of public interest well fitting under the parameters
mentioned in the verdict dated 13.11.2019 in Civil Appeal No 10044 and 10045 of 2010 by
the Constitution Bench. While referring to 
Section 11
 of the RTI Act, 2005, the Appellant
submitted that not providing any notice to the concerned "Third Parties" within five days
after the Supreme Court verdict implied that the CPIO considered providing the information
without any need of even issuing 'Third Party Notices' While submitting that the Supreme
Court order was read in the open court where both the Petitioner and the Respondent were
present, the Appellant submitted that the CPIO should have decided disclosure of
information within 45 days of the Supreme Court Order i.e., 28.12.2019.The CPIO also did
not follow the guidelines mentioned in 
Section 11
 that only 10 days time was given to
'Third Parties' for sending comments and no reminder needs to be issued. The Appellant
also prayed for adequate and exemplary compensation for the mental agony, time and
money spent in pursuing the matter for so long.



The Commission was in receipt of a written submission from the Appellant dated
24.07.2020 (Appeal No. CIC/WB/A/2009/000859) wherein while referring to the RTI
application dated 06.07.2009, the Appellant stated that the CPIO subsequent to his two
separate submissions dated 01.06.2020 before the Hon'ble Chief Justice of India and the
Commission responded vide letter dated 20.06.2019 (received by him on 06.07.2020) with a
delay and by adopting an approach in contradiction with the 
RTI Act, 2005
. While referring
to the reply of the CPIO on point no 04 of the RTI application, the Appellant stated that the
CPIO advised him to approach the Government and the Bar Council of India for
information sought for and that he had appealed to the CPIO to transfer his application
 u/s 6
(3)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. He further referred to the reply of the CPIO on point no 08 of the
RTI application which was denied on the ground that "the query is presumptive in nature;

hence, no information" and stated that the matter was highlighted especially after the
Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court ordered on the same after more than a
decade of filing the RTI application. While stating that the query was not presumptive in
nature, the Appellant submitted that a reply could be provided by the Respondent that "no
information exists on record." The Appellant while referring to the judgment of the
Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court of India in Civil Appeal No. 2683/2009 dated
13.11.2019 prayed to direct the CPIO at Supreme Court to revisit query no 08 for seeking
assistance from the O/o the Hon'ble Chief Justice of India
 u/s 5 (4)
 or else Hon'ble Chief
Justice of India could be directed to provide the information on the said point. While
referring to 
Section 11
 of the RTI Act, 2005, the Appellant submitted that not providing any
notice to the concerned "Third Parties" within five days after the Supreme Court verdict
implied that the CPIO considered providing the information without any need of even
issuing 'Third Party Notices' While submitting that the Supreme Court order was read in
the open court where both the Petitioner and the Respondent were present, the Appellant
submitted that the CPIO should have decided disclosure of information within 45 days of
the Supreme Court Order i.e., 28.12.2019. The CPIO also did not follow the guidelines
mentioned in 
Section 11
 that only 10 days time was given to 'Third Parties' for sending
comments and no reminder needs to be issued. The Third Party concerned also did not send
any comments within 10 days of receipt of notices hence the CPIO has to provide
 information in accordance with initial sentence of 
Section 11
 without considering the
comments sent by the Third Parties. The Appellant thereafter referred to the newsreport
titled "Who tweaked report on Raja's attempt to influence judge" (Times of India
09.12.2010) and submitted that the information sought was in public domain long back
hence it was unjustified on the part of the CPIO to further delay in providing the
information even after the Supreme Court verdict dated 13.11.2019 and that all the
parameters of "Public Interest" as detailed by the Supreme Court verdict dated 13.11.2019
were met in providing timely information because exposure of those trying to influence
judiciary was a key factor for ensuring judicial independence. Thus the Appellant prayed for
adequate and exemplary compensation for the mental agony, time and money spent in
pursuing the matter for so long that too when the information was in the public domain long
back as per Times of India report dated 09.12.2010.



The Commission was also in receipt of a written submission from the Respondent (Appeal
No. CIC/WB/A/2009/000529) dated 31.07.2020 wherein it was stated that the earlier
direction of the Commission dated 24.11.2009 was challenged before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court of India vide SLP (C) 32855/2009 (Converted to Civil Appeal No 10044/2010). The
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India vide order dated 04.12.2009 had granted interim stay as
prayed for which was conveyed to the Commission vide letter dated 11.12.2009 and as such
the claim of the Appellant regarding non-compliance of the direction in
CIC/WB/A/2009/000529 doesn't arise. Furthermore, the Supreme Court vide judgement
dated 13.11.2019 partly allowed the Civil Appeal No 10044-10045/ 2010 and remitted the
matter to the CPIO, Supreme Court of India for re-examination in terms of the said
judgement. In compliance with the said direction of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India,
the Appellant had already been provided with an appropriate reply by the CPIO, Supreme
Court of India vide letter dated 22.06.2020 with respect to the RTI application dated
23.01.2009. The copy of the CPIOs reply dated 22.06.2020 and 07.02.2020 were enclosed
with the written submission.



The Commission was also in receipt of a written submission from the Respondent dated
30.07.2020      for    Appeal     No     CIC/WB/A/2009/000859        connected      with
CIC/WB/A/2009/000408, 410 and 530 wherein it was stated that the earlier direction of the
Commission dated 20/24.11.2009 was challenged before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India vide SLP (C) 32856/2009 (Converted to Civil Appeal No 10045/2010). The Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India vide order dated 04.12.2009 had granted interim stay as prayed for
which was conveyed to the Commission vide letter dated 11.12.2009 and as such the claim
of the Appellant regarding non-compliance of the direction in CIC/WB/A/2009/000859
doesn't arise. Furthermore, the Supreme Court vide judgement dated 13.11.2019 partly
allowed the Civil Appeal No 10044-10045/ 2010 and remitted the matter to the CPIO,
Supreme Court of India for re-examination in terms of the said judgement. In compliance
with the said direction of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, the Appellant had already
been provided with an appropriate reply by the CPIO, Supreme Court of India vide letter
dated 20.06.2020 with respect to the RTI application dated 23.01.2009. The copy of the
CPIOs reply dated 20.06.2020 alongwith its enclosures was annexed with the written
submission.

 The Commission observed that in the present instance the Appellant had not exercised the
alternative remedy of exhausting the First Appeal mechanism for seeking information under
the provisions of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 and had directly approached the Commission against
the decision of the CPIO inter alia praying for disclosure of information. However, as
mentioned above, the Appellant had subsequently filed the First Appeal after approaching
the Commission in both these matters. 
In this context, the Commission drew the attention
of the Appellant to the decision and the spirit enunciated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India in 
Agnivesh Gupta vs Joint Secretary (L&E, A) & CVO and Ors
 Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 864/2019) dated 19.05.2020 wherein a full bench comprising of Hon'ble Dr. Justice D.
Y. Chandrachud, Hon'ble Mr. Justice Hemant Gupta and Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ajay Rastogi,
the Apex Court while deciding the petition challenging the order of the Chief Information
Commissioner dated 17.05.2018 held as under:




       "The petitioner has an efficacious and alternate remedy of challenging the order of
       Chief Information Commissioner in proceedings under 
Article 226
 of the
       Constitution before the appropriate High Court. The petitioner is at liberty to do so.
       We clarify that in the above view of the matter, we have not expressed any opinion
       on the merits of the grievance, which the petitioner is at liberty to pursue before the
       appropriate High Court."



In the context of utilisation of efficacious alternative remedy, the Commission also referred
to the decision of the Division Bench of the Apex Court in 
Roshina T. vs.
Abdul Azeez K.T. & Ors. CIVIL APPEAL NO.11759 OF
 2018 Arising out of SLP (C) No.
30465 of 2017) dated 03.12.2018 wherein it was held as under:




 
"15. It has been consistently held by this Court that a         regular     suit       is    the
       appropriate        remedy     for    settlement of the disputes relating to property rights
       between           the        private           persons.         The         remedy           under
       
Article 226
 of the Constitution shall not be available
       except where violation of some statutory duty on thepart of statutory authority is alle
       ged. In such cases, the      Court       has     jurisdiction    to    issue       appropriate
       directions to the authority concerned. It is held that the       High     Court         cannot
       allow its constitutional jurisdiction to be used for deciding disputes, for which
           remedies            under           the     general         law,           civil            or
       criminal are available. This Court has held that it is
       not intended to replace the ordinary remedies byway of a civil suit or application
       available to an                     aggrieved person. The jurisdiction under 
Article 226

       of the Constitution       being special and extraordinary it           should          not     be
       exercised               casually                          or            lightly                on
       mere asking by the litigant. (See 
Mohan Pande vs.                                            Usha
        Rani
, 1992 (4) SCC 61 and                            Dwarka                                Prasad
        Agrawal vs BD Agrawal, (2003) 6 SCC 230)."




Moreover, in the matter of 
GM, Sri Siddeshwara Co-operative Bank Ltd. & Anr. vs. Sri
Ikbal & Ors.
 in CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6989-6990 OF 2013 (Arising out of SLP(C)
Nos.17704-17705 of 2012)dated 22.08.2013, it was held as under:




        "27. There is one more aspect in the matter which has troubled us. Against the
       action of the Bank under 
Section 13(4)
 of the SARFAESI Act, the borrower had a
       remedy of appeal to the Debts Recovery Tribunal (DRT) under 
Section 17
. The
       remedy provided under 
Section 17
 is an efficacious remedy. The borrower did not
       avail of that remedy and further remedies from that order and instead directly
       approached the High Court in extraordinary jurisdiction under 
Article 226
 of the
       Constitution of India.



       31. No doubt an alternative remedy is not an absolute bar to the exercise of
       extraordinary jurisdiction under 
Article 226
 but by now it is well settled that where
       a statute provides efficacious and adequate remedy, the High Court will do well in
       not entertaining a petition under 
Article 226.
 On misplaced considerations, statutory
       procedures cannot be allowed to be circumvented."



A reference can also be made to the decision of the Apex Court in 
Kanaiyalal Lalchand
Sachdev and others vs. State of Maharashtra and others
, 2011 (2) SCC 782, the relevant
extracts of which are as under:




       "23. In our opinion, therefore, the High Court rightly dismissed the petition on the
       ground that an efficacious remedy was available to the appellants under 
Section 17

       of the Act. It is well settled that ordinarily relief under Articles 226/227 of the
       Constitution of India is not available if an efficacious alternative remedy is
       available to any aggrieved person."



In the light of the aforementioned judgment of the Apex Court as cited above, it is evident
that in the judicial / quasi judicial process the procedures for remedial action should
invariably be exhausted unless there are compelling reasons for not doing so.
 DECISION:



Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by both the parties and in
the light of the decisions cited abovemaintaining the spirit of judicial/ quasi judicial
mechanism as also the judgement of the Apex Court dated 13.11.2019 instructing the CPIO
to re-examine the application keeping in view 
Section 11 (1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, the
Commission instructs the Appellant to exercise the alternative remedy of First Appellate
Authority (FAA) mechanism prior to approaching the Commission in the matter.



The CPIO is also advised to ensure that timelines prescribed under the 
RTI Act, 2005
 is
complied with in letter and spirit to facilitate expeditious flow of information to the
information seekers.



The Commission also instructs the Respondent Public Authority to convene periodic
conferences/seminars to sensitize, familiarize and educate the concerned officials about the
relevant provisions of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 for effective discharge of its duties and
responsibilities.



                                                              Bimal Julka(िबमल जु का)
                                        Chief Information Commissioner (मु य सूचना आयु )

Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मा णतस या पत ित)




K.L. Das (के .एल.दास)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26186535/ 
[email protected]

 दनांक / Date: 14.08.2020



Copy to:



   1. The Secretary General, Supreme Court of India, Tilak Marg, Mandi House,
      New Delhi-110001


   2. The Registrar and First Appellate Authority, RTI, Tilak Marg, Mandi House,
      New Delhi-110001