[Cites 
26
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Biplab Das vs Department Of Atomic Energy on 6 July, 2020


                                      के न्द्रीय सूचना आयोग
                            Central Information Commission
                                 बाबा गंगनाथ मागग, मुननरका
                             Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                                 नई दिल्ली, New Delhi - 110067

नितीय अपील संख्या / Second Appeal No.:- CIC/DOATE/A/2018/164117-BJ

Mr. Biplab Das

                                                                     ....अपीलकताग/Appellant

                                          VERSUS
                                            बनाम
CPIO,
Chief Administrative Officer,
Department of Atomic Energy,
BARC Facilities, Kalpakkam -603102
                                                                 ...प्रनतवािीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing      :              06.07.2020
Date of Decision     :              06.07.2020

Date of RTI application                                                06.08.2018
CPIO's response                                                        31.08.2018
Date of the First Appeal                                               05.09.2018
First Appellate Authority's response                                   04.10.2018
Date of diarised receipt of Appeal by the Commission                   24.10.2018

                                         ORDER



FACTS
The Appellant vide his RTI application sought information regarding the certified copies of
his APARs for last nineteen years (1999-2000 to 2017-18) with the detailed evaluation,
remarks, comments, noting of all the hierarchical stages those APARs had gone through.
The CPIO, vide letter dated 31.08.2018, denied disclosure of information under 
Section
8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. Dissatisfied by the response of the CPIO, the Appellant
approached the FAA. The FAA, vide its order dated 04.10.2018, upheld the CPIO's
response.



HEARING:

Facts emerging during the hearing:

The following were present:



                                                                                Page 1 of 11


 Appellant: Mr. Biplab Das through TC;

Respondent: Smt. Sheela Mohan, Chief Administrative Officer and CPIO through TC;



The Appellant reiterated the contents of the RTI application and stated that the information
sought regarding the certified copies of his own APARs for last nineteen years (1999-2000 to
2017-18) with the detailed evaluation, remarks, comments, noting, was not provided to him.
He further stated that there were several Supreme Court/High Courts/CIC rulings/decisions
in this regard and therefore, the information sought should be provided to him. The Appellant
further relied on his written submission. The Commission was in receipt of an email from the
Appellant dated 1st July, 2020, wherein it was submitted that he had written to the Chief
Administrative Officer to provide his APAR grading for the last six years. This had no relation
with his RTI case. However, the Chief Administrative Officer (also CPIO) had linked the request
with his RTI query and refused to give him the APAR Gradings for last six years. The CAO cum
CPIO have denied to give him the final grading /final assessment sheet of APAR under the same

section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act 2005, by stating that "... is not governed under the guidelines
prescribed for communications for APAR Gradings..". A copy of the application and the reply
by the Chief Administrative Officer was attached for kind reference.



In its reply, the Respondent reiterated the replies of the CPIO/FAA and stated that the
information sought by the Appellant did not serve the larger public interest and therefore, the
same was denied under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. Moreover, being a Scientific
Organization there were several strategic works also going on simultaneously. In addition, it
was informed that a Writ Petition 2268/2018 and also subsequent W.M.P. No. 2765/2018, filed
by the Public Authority before the Hon'ble Madras High Court challenging the decisions of the
CIC (in the cases CIC/RM/A/2014/902663-YA and CIC/SS/A/2014/000005-YA) to furnish
copies of entire contents of APAR to Shri D. C. Pandey, an employee of their Unit is under trial
and pending for Orders. The Respondent further relied on its written submissions. The
Commission was in receipt of a written submission from the Respondent dated 25th June, 2020,
wherein at the outset it was submitted that in the wake of prevalent lock down in force, due to the
spread of COVID-19, in Chengalpattu District of Tamil Nadu under which their office is located,
they requested to consider their written submissions for arriving at a decision. The Respondent
further reiterated the contents of the RTI application, reply/order of the CPIO/FAA. In addition,
it was informed that Mr. Biplab Das joined the Department in 1994 as a Technician/C [Level-4
in present Pay Matrix pattern], which is a lower rung Group C Post. Since then from time to time
the official had been promoted to next suitable higher grades, on completion of required
Minimum Eligible Period for consideration of promotion under Merit Promotion Scheme, a
unique promotion scheme of Department of Atomic Energy because of which he could reach in
2019 the current position of Scientific Officer/F [Level 12 in Pay Matrix], a group A post
equivalent to Deputy Secretary Rank. Therefore, the allegation made in the 2nd Appeal that the
Appellant is a Scheduled Caste Officer that's why he was denied copies of APAR is false.
Besides, it was submitted that a Writ Petition 2268/2018 and also subsequent W.M.P. No.
2765/2018, filed by the Public Authority before the Hon'ble Madras High Court challenging the
decisions of the CIC (in the cases CIC/RM/A/2014/902663-YA and CIC/SS/A/2014/000005-
YA) to furnish copies of entire contents of APAR to Shri D. C. Pandey, an employee of their
Unit is under trial and pending for Orders.



                                                                                       Page 2 of 11


 Attention of the Respondent was drawn towards the decisions of the Superior Courts regarding
the disclosure of an entry (whether it is poor, fair, average, good or very good) to the concerned
public servant after redaction of the names of the reviewing, reporting and accepting officers.,
otherwise there is violation of the principle of fairness, which is the soul of natural justice.



In the context of disclosure of entry in the employee's own ACR, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India in the decision of 
Dev Dutt vs Union of India & Ors
 on 12 May, 2008, Civil Appeal No.
7631 OF 2002, had held as under


 
"19. In our opinion, every entry in the A.C.R. of a public servant must be
       communicated to him within a reasonable period, whether it is a poor, fair, average,
       good or very good entry. This is because non-communication of such an entry may
       adversely affect the employee in two ways : (1) Had the entry been communicated to
       him he would know about the assessment of his work and conduct by his superiors,
       which would enable him to improve his work in future (2) He would have an
       opportunity of making a representation against the entry if he feels it is unjustified,
       and pray for its upgradation. Hence non-communication of an entry is arbitrary, and it
       has been held by the Constitution Bench decision of this Court in 
Maneka Gandhi vs.
       Union of India
 (supra) that arbitrariness violates 
Article 14
 of the Constitution.




       20. Thus it is not only when there is a bench mark but in all cases that an entry (whether
       it is poor, fair, average, good or very good) must be communicated to a public servant,
       otherwise there is violation of the principle of fairness, which is the soul of natural
       justice. Even an outstanding entry should be communicated since that would boost the
       morale of the employee and make him work harder."



The Commission also referred to the OM No. 21011/1/2005-Estt (A) (Pt-II) dated 14th May,
2009 of the Government of India, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and Training) wherein the attention of the Ministries/Departments
were drawn towards "the existing provisions in regard to preparation and maintenance of Annual
Confidential Reports which inter-alia provide that only adverse remarks should be
communicated to the officer reported upon for representation, if any. The Supreme Court has
held in their judgement dated 12.5.2008 in the case of Dev Dutt vs Union of India (Civil Appeal
No.7631 of 2002) that the object of writing the confidential report and making entries is to give
an opportunity to the public servant to improve the performance. The 2nd Administrative
Reforms Commission in their 10th Report has also recommended that the performance appraisal
system for all services be made more consultative and transparent on the lines of the PAR of the
All India Services.



2. Keeping in view the above position, the matter regarding communication of entries in the
ACRs in the case of Civil Services under the Government of India has been further reviewed and
it was directed to covey the following decisions of the Government:-



(i) The existing nomenclature of the Annual Confidential Report will be modified as Annual
Performance Assessment Report (APAR).



                                                                                      Page 3 of 11


 (ii) The full APAR including the overall grade and assessment of integrity shall be
communicated to the concerned officer after the Report is complete with the remarks of the
Reviewing Officer and the Accepting Authority wherever such system is in vogue. Where
Government servant has only one supervisory level above him as in the case of personal staff
attached to officers, such communication shall be made after the reporting officer has completed
the performance assessment.



(iii) The Section entrusted with the maintenance of APARs after its receipt shall disclose the
same to the officer reported upon.



(iv) The concerned officer shall be given the opportunity to make any representation against the
entries and the final grading given in the Report within a period of fifteen days from the date of
receipt of the entries in the APAR. The representation shall be restricted to the specific factual
observations contained in the report leading to assessment of the officer in terms of attributes,
work output etc. While communicating the entries, it shall be made clear that in case no
representation is received within the fifteen days, it shall be deemed that he/she has no
representation to make. If the concerned APAR Section does not receive any information from
the concerned officer on or before fifteen days from the date of discourse, the APAR will be
treated as final.



(v) The new system of communicating the entries in the APAR shall be made applicable
prospectively only with effect from the reporting period 2008-09 which is to be initiated after 1st
April 2009.



(vi) The competent authority for considering adverse remarks under the existing instructions may
consider the representation, if necessary, in consultation with the reporting and/or reviewing
officer and shall decide the matter objectively based on the material placed before him within a
period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the representation.



(vii) The competent authority after due consideration may reject the representation or may accept
and modify the APAR accordingly. The decision of the competent authority and the final grading
shall be communicated to the officer reported upon within fifteen days of receipt of the decision
of the competent authority by the concerned APAR Section."



In judgment of the Ld. Single Judge of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in 
R.K. Jain v. Union of
India, W.P.
 6756 of 2010 dated 08.12.2011 which was affirmed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
of India vide its aforementioned decision it was held as under:




       "10. Therefore, except in cases involving overriding public interest, the ACR record of an
       officer cannot be disclosed to any person other than the officer himself/herself."



Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of 
THDC India Ltd. vs. R.S. Raturi,
W.P. (C) No.
 903 dated 08.07.2014 wherein it had been held as under:




       12. However, this Court is of the view that the respondent is entitled to the contents of
       his own ACR after redaction of the names of the reviewing, reporting and accepting





                                                                                       Page 4 of 11

 officers. 
In fact, another coordinate Bench of this Court in 
THDC India Ltd. v. T.
Chandra Biswas
 199 (2013) DLT 284 has held as under:-




9. While the learned counsel for the respondent has contended before me that the
respondent ought to have been supplied with the ACRs for the period 2004 to 2007, the
respondent has not assailed that part of the order of the CIC. In my view, while the
contention of the respondent has merit, which is that she cannot be denied information
with regard to her own ACRs and that information cannot fall in the realm of any of the
exclusionary provisions cited before me by the learned counsel for the petitioner i.e.

Section 8(1)(d)
, (e) and (j), there is a procedural impediment, in as much as, there is no
petition filed to assail that part of the order passed by the CIC.



9.1. In my view, the right to obtain her own ACRs inheres in the respondent which
cannot be denied to the respondent under the provisions of 
Section 8 (1)(d)
, (e) and (j)
of the 
RTI Act
. The ACRs are meant to inform an employee as to the manner in which
he has performed in the given period and the areas which require his attention, so that
he may improve his performance qua his work.



9.2 That every entry in the ACR of an employee requires to be disclosed whether or not
an executive instruction is issued in that behalf-is based on the premise that disclosure of
the contents of ACR results in fairness in action and transparency in public
administration. See 
Dev Dutt vs. Union of India
 8 SCC 725 at page 732, paragraph 13;


page 733, paragraph 17; and at page 737, paragraphs 36, 37 and 38.



9.3 Mr. Malhotra sought to argue that, in 
Dev Dutt
's case, the emphasis was in providing
information with regard to gradings and not the narrative. Thus a submission cannot be
accepted for more than one reason.




9.4 First, providing to an employee gradings without the narrative is like giving a
conclusion in judicial/quasi-judicial or even an administrative order without providing
the reasons which led to the conclusion. If the purpose of providing ACRs is to enable the
employee to assess his performance and to judge for himself whether the person writing
his ACR has made an objective assessment of his work, the access to the narrative which
led to the grading is a must. [See 
State of U.P. Vs. Yamuna Shankar Misra and Anr.,
MANU/SC/0914/1997
 : (1997) 4 SCC 7]. The narrative would fashion the decision of the
employee as to whether he ought to challenge the grading set out in the ACR.




9.5 Second, the fact that provision of ACRs is a necessary concomitant of a transparent,
fair and efficient administration is now recognized by the DOPT in its OM dated
14.05.2009. The fact that the OM is prospective would not, in my view, impinge upon the
underlying principle the OM seeks to establish. The only caveat one would have to enter,
is that, while providing the contents of the ACR the names of the Reviewing, Reporting
and the Accepting Officer will have to be redacted.



13. Consequently, this Court is of the view that ACR grading/ratings as also the marks
given to the candidates based on the said ACR grading/ratings and their interview marks
contained in the DPC proceedings can be disclosed only to the concerned employee and
not to any other employee as that would constitute third party information.



                                                                                Page 5 of 11


        9.9 On the other aspect with which the petitioner is aggrieved, I am not persuaded by
       the argument of the petitioner that the information with regard to the DPC proceedings
       would fall within the exception provided under 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act. In my
       view, information with regard to DPC proceedings cannot come within the ambit and
       scope of any of three exclusions i.e. commercial confidence, trade secret and
       intellectual property rights. Though, I am conscious of the fact that the information
       referred to in 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act is not confined to the three types of
       information 
referred to above
 - no amount of liberality adopted in that behalf would
       bring ACRs within its ambit. 
Section 8(1)(d)
 would, in my view, include such
       information which takes colour from the expression commercial confidence, trade
       secrets and intellectual property."

A reference can also be made to a recent decision of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the
matter of Mukesh Kumar vs. Chief Information Commission, CIC, W.P. (C) 10691/ 2016 dated
19.09.2017 wherein while allowing redaction of the names of interview panel members, a
direction was given to disclose the break-up of interview marks awarded by them. 
A reference
was also made in this matter to the earlier decision in the matter of 
THDC India Ltd. vs. R.S.
Raturi, W.P. (C) No.
 903 dated 08.07.2014. The relevant extracts of the decision are as under:




       "10. In view of the above, the controversy essentially remained with regard to the viva
       voce marks awarded by the Interview Committee to other candidates. 
In this context, the
       CIC relying on the decision of this Court in 
THDC India Limited v. R.K. Raturi
: W.P.(C)
       903/2013, held that third party information could not be disclosed.




 
11. This Court is of the view that the decision in the case of 
THDC India Ltd.
 (supra) is
       not applicable to the information sought by the petitioner. In that case the question was
       regarding ACR gradings /ratings considered in DPC proceedings. It is in that context
       that this Court had held that ACR gradings and the marks awarded in DPC proceeding
       could only be disclosed to the concerned employee and not to any other employee as
       that would constitute third party information. This Court had further held that such
       information could be disclosed only if the CIC found that a larger public interest was
       involved and further after following the procedure prescribed under 
Section 11(1)
 and
       
19(4)
 of the Act.




       15. Insofar as handwritten marks awarded by interview panel is concerned, those
       obviously from a part of the working papers of the interview panel and cannot be
       disclosed; disclosure of such handwritten record would also inevitably disclose the
       identity of the members of the interview panel, which as stated above cannot be disclosed
       to the petitioner."

It was also observed that as per 
Section 10
 of the RTI Act, 2005 all such details relating to the
names of the reviewing, reporting and accepting officers/ scientific/ strategic information, etc.,
could be severed from APARs to provide the remaining information. 
In this context, a reference
was made to the decision of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in its decision dated 7/10/2013
[W.P. (C) 4079/2013 
Union Public Service Commission vs. G S Sandhu
] wherein while
observing that denial of notings altogether was not justified directed to block the name,
designation or any other indication which disclose or tend to disclose the identity of author, it
was held as under:




                                                                                      Page 6 of 11


        "11. In my view, the apprehension of the petitioner that if the identity of the author of
       the file notings is revealed by his name, designation or in any other manner, there is a
       possibility of such an employee being targeted, harassed and even intimidated by the
       persons against whom an adverse noting is recorded by him on the file of UPSC, is fully
       justified. Though, ultimately it is for the members of the UPSC who are to accept or
       reject such notings, this can hardly be disputed that the notings do play a vital role in the
       advice which UPSC ultimately renders to the concerned department. Therefore, the
       person against whom an adverse advice is given may hold the employee of UPSC
       recording a note adverse to him on the file, responsible for an adverse advice given by
       UPSC against him and may, therefore, harass and sometime even harm such an
       employee/officer of UPSC, directly or indirectly. To this extent, the officers of UPSC need
       to be protected. However, the purpose can be fully achieved by blocking the name,
       designation or any other indication which would disclose or tend to disclose the identity
       of the author of the noting. Denying the notings altogether would not be justified when
       the intended objective can be fully achieved by adopting such safeguards."

Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the decision of KVS v. CIC and Anr. W.P.(C)
6892/2009 dated 15.09.2009 while upholding the decision of the Commission had held as under:

       "The only objection raised by the petitioner against the supply of
       statement of witnesses was under 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.
       The said provision stipulates that information disclosure of which would endanger life
       and physical safety of any person or identity, the source of information or assistance
       given in confidence for law enforcement and security purposes need not be supplied.
       The Information Commissioner keeping in mind 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of the Right to
       Information Act, 2005 has directed that the name of the witnesses need not be disclosed
       to the respondent No.2.

       In fact the order passed by the Information Commissioner seeks to rely upon 
section 10
,
       which permits withholding of certain portions of information by applying severability
       principle. The order of the Information Commissioner takes care of the apprehension of
       the petitioner."

In the context of providing the copy of note sheets, the Commission referred to the decision of
the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of 
Union of India vs. R.S. Khan WP (C) No.
 9355
of 2009 and CM No. 7144 of 2009 dated 07.10.2010 wherein it was held as under:




       "This Court concurs with the view expressed by the CIC that in the context of a
       government servant performing official functions and making notes on a file about the
       performance or conduct of another officer, such noting cannot be said to be given to the
       government pursuant to a 'fiduciary relationship' with the government within the
       meaning of 
Section 8(1)(e)
 of RTI Act. The Union of India cannot rely upon 
Section
       8(1)(e)
 of RTI Act, to deny information to the Petitioner in the present case. This Court
       finds no merits in any of the apprehensions expressed by the CPIO in the order rejecting
       the Respondent's application with reference to either 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of RTI Act. The
       disclosure of information sought by the Petitioner can hardly endanger the life or
       physical safety of any person. There must be some basis to invoke these provisions. It
       cannot be a mere apprehension. As regards 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act, there is no



                                                                                        Page 7 of 11

        question that nothings made in the files by government servants in discharge of their
       official functions is definitely a public activity and concerns the larger public interest.
       In the present case, 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act was wrongly invoked by the CPIO and
       by the Appellate Authority to deny information to the Respondent."

Furthermore, in a recent decision the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in its order dated 12.02.2018
in W.P.(C) 7845/2013 (
Paras Nath Singh Vs. Union of India
) had held as under:




       10. The contention that notings made by a junior officer for use by his superiors is third
       party information, which requires compliance of 
Section 11
 of the Act, is unmerited. Any
       noting made in the official records of the Government/Public Authority is information
       belonging to the concerned Government/Public Authority. The question whether the
       information relates to a third party is to be determined by the nature of the information
       and not its source. The Government is not a natural person and all information contained
       in the official records of the Government / public authority is generated by individuals
       (whether employed with the Government or not) or other entities. Thus, the reasoning,
       that the notings or information generated by an employee during the course of his
       employment is his information and thus has to be treated as relating to a third party, is
       flawed.



       11. 
Section 8
 of the Act provides for exemption from disclosure of certain information
       and none of the provisions of 
Section 8
 provide for blanket exemption that entitles the
       respondent to withhold all notings on a file.



The Commission observed that the provisions of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 and various judgments
on the subject matter clearly establishes that it is the duty of the CPIO to provide clear,
cogent and precise response to the information seekers. 
Section 7 (8) (i)
 of the RTI Act, 2005
also states that where a request for disclosure of information is rejected, the CPIO shall
communicate the reasons for such rejection. The Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the matter of 
J P
Aggarwal v. Union of India (WP (C
) no. 7232/2009 clearly stated that the PIO acts as the Pivot for
enforcing the implementation of the Act. The relevant extracts of the decision are as under:




       " 7"it is the PIO to whom the application is submitted and it is who is responsible for
       ensuring that the information as sought is provided to the applicant within the statutory
       requirements of the Act. 
Section 5(4)
 is simply to strengthen the authority of the PIO
       within the department; if the PIO finds a default by those from whom he has sought
       information. The PIO is expected to recommend a remedial action to be taken". 
The RTI
       Act
 makes the PIO the pivot for enforcing the implementation of the Act."



       8.............The PIO is expected to apply his / her mind, duly analyse the material before
       him / her and then either disclose the information sought or give grounds for non-
       disclosure."



                                                                                      Page 8 of 11


 The Commission also observed that as per the provisions of 
Section 19 (5)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, in
an Appeal proceeding, the onus to prove that a denial of a request was justified shall be on the CPIO.
Neither the Respondent present during the hearing nor the CPIO responding to the RTI application,
could justify their position as to how the disclosure of information would be in contravention to any
of the provisions enshrined under 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act, 2005.



While observing that in order to deny information under any of the exemption mentioned under

Section 8 (1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, the Respondent is required to provide justification or establish the
reason why such exemption was claimed, the Commission referred to the decision of the Hon'ble
High Court of Delhi in the matter of 
Dy. Commissioner of Police v. D.K. Sharma, WP (C) No.
 12428
of 2009 dated 15.12.2010, wherein it was held as under:




       "6. This Court is inclined to concur with the view expressed by the CIC that in order to
       deny the information under the 
RTI Act
 the authority concerned would have to show a
       justification with reference to one of the specific clauses under 
Section 8 (1)
 of the RTI
       Act. In the instant case, the Petitioner has been unable to discharge that burden. The
       mere fact that a criminal case is pending may not by itself be sufficient unless there is a
       specific power to deny disclosure of the information concerning such case."



The Commission also noted that it should be the endeavour of the CPIO to ensure that
maximum assistance should be provided to the RTI applicants to ensure the flow of
information. In this context, the Commission referred to the OM No.4/9/2008-IR dated
24.06.2008 issued by the DoP&T on the Subject "Courteous behavior with the persons
seeking information under the 
RTI Act, 2005
" wherein it was stated as under:



       "The undersigned is directed to say that the responsibility of a public authority and
       its public information officers (PIO) is not confined to furnish information but also
       to provide necessary help to the information seeker, wherever necessary."



The Commission observed that there is complete negligence and laxity in the public authority in
dealing with the RTI applications. It is abundantly clear that such matters are being ignored and
set aside without application of mind which reflects disrespect towards the 
RTI Act, 2005
 itself.
The Commission expressed its displeasure on the casual and callous approach adopted by the
respondent in responding to the RTI application. It was felt that the conduct of Respondent was
against the spirit of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 which was enacted to ensure greater transparency and
effective access to the information.



                                                                                           Page 9 of 11


 DECISION:



Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by both the parties and in the
light of the judgments of the Superior Courts cited above as also the OM No. 21011/1/2005-
Estt (A) (Pt-II) dated 14th May, 2009 of the Government of India, Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training), the Commission directed the
CPIO to re-examine the RTI application of the Appellant considering the decisions of the
Superior Courts and furnish the information as sought by the Appellant in his own case
following the procedure laid down under 
Section 10
 of the RTI Act, 2005, within a period of 30
days from the date of receipt of this order depending upon the condition for containment of the
Corona Virus Pandemic in the Country or through email, as agreed.
The Commission also instructs the Respondent Public Authority to convene periodic
conferences/seminars to sensitize, familiarize and educate the concerned officials about the
relevant provisions of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 for effective discharge of its duties and responsibilities.



The Appeal stands disposed with the above direction.



(The Order will be posted on the website of the Commission).



                                                                Bimal Julka (नबमल जुल्का)
                                         Chief Information Commissioner (मुख्य सूचना आयुक्त)

Authenticated true copy
(अभिप्रमाणित सत्यापित प्रतत)




K.L. Das (के .एल.िास)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26186535/ 
[email protected]

दिनांक / Date: 06.07.2020





                                                                                       Page 10 of 11

 Copy to:-



   1. Facility Director, BARCF (K) and Appellate Authority, Department of Atomic Energy,
      BARC Facilities, Kalpakkam -603102





                                                                              Page 11 of 11