[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Kumar Medhavi vs Reserve Bank Of India on 17 July, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                              के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                           बाबा गंगनाथ माग , मुिनरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                         नई  द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/RBIND/A/2022/610843 & CIC/RBIND/A/2022/619816

Kumar Medhavi
(Yes Bank Ltd.)                                            ......अपीलकता /Appellant
                                     VERSUS
                                      बनाम
CPIO                                                     .... ितवादीगण /Respondent
Enforcement Department Central Office
Reserve Bank of India, Mezannine Floor
Main Building, Fort, Mumbai-400001

CPIO
Department of Supervision
Reserve Bank of India
World Trade Centre-1, Colaba
Cuffe Parade, Mumbai-400005

Date of Hearing                  :   03/07/2023
Date of Decision                 :   03/07/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :           Saroj Punhani

(Note : The above mentioned appeals of the Appellant are clubbed together as
the subject-matter is similar in nature): (The instant appeal has been filed by
the third party i.e. Yes Bank Ltd. aggrieved by an order passed by the FAA, RBI)

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:
  File No.         RTI        CPIO         FA filed on     FAA order    2nd Appeal/
              application Replied on                                    Complaint
                filed on                                                   Dated
  610843      26.04.2019 12.07.2019        07.08.2019      09.11.2021   21.02.2022
  619816      26.04.2019 01.11.2021        29.11.2021      03.01.2022   06.04.2022


                                       1
                             CIC/RBIND/A/2022/610843

Information sought
:

The RTI applicant Shri Girish Mittal filed an RTI application dated 26.04.2019
seeking the following information:

   (a) "Kindly provide copies of inspection reports of ICICI Bank, AXIS Bank, Yes
       Bank, HDFC Bank & State Bank of India from, Bank of Baroda, Punjab
       National Bank, Union Bank of India from 1st April, 2015 till date.



   (b) Kindly provide copies of any show cause notices issued to banks mentioned
       in point (a), response to the show cause notices and action taken, if any, by
       RBI.



   (c) Kindly provide list of defaulters of loans greater than 50 crores as available
       with RBI.



   (d) Copies of case files with file notings on various irregularities detected by RBI
       in case of Sahara Group of companies and erstwhile Bank of Rajasthan by
       these entities themselves and their known/unknown promoters.



   (e) Kindly provide information on amount spent in form of fees of lawyers, out
       of pocket expenses alongwith any other charges spent by RBI in defending
       the cases against the orders of CIC in High Courts/Supreme Court. Kindly
       provide list giving details in each case or provide copies of challans, invoices,
       bills etc with file notings, approvals et al. This information needs to be
       provided even if it is not available on consolidated basis and spread across
       various files.



   (f) Kindly provide information on the directory of employees of RBI which is
       required to be declared as per 4(1Xb)(1 0) with their email ids. The details
       on website do not give their, mobile phone (if paid by RBI) and email id."



In response, the CPIO vide its letter dated 12.07.2019 issued a notice
 u/s. 11(3)
 of
the RTI Act to the Appellant i.e. Yes Bank Ltd. stating as under:



"Please refer to our letter EFD.CO.RTI No. 947/07.03.001/2018-2019 dated May
29, 2019 wherein we had issued a notice under 
section 11(1)
 read with 
section
11(2)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005 with respect to a RTI request No. RTI
RBIND/R/2019/51887/4 received from Shri Girish Mittal to enable you to make a
written submission as to whether the Show Cause Notices, your replies thereto
and the Speaking Orders dated October 23, 2017 and January 31, 2019 passed by

                                           2

 RBI may be disclosed to the applicant or not along with reasons for exemption
from disclosure under any clause of 
RTI Act, 2005
.

2. After considering your response dated June 17, 2019 to the %above notice, it
has been decided to disclose to the applicant the Show Cause Notices, your replies
thereto and the Speaking Orders dated October 23, 2017 and January 31, 2019
passed by RBI, after severing under 
section 10 (1)
 of RTI Act, 2005 the information
exempt from disclosure. Accordingly, notice of the decision taken in the matter is
hereby being given as required under 
Section 11(3)
 of the RTI Act 2005. Copies of
the aforesaid documents after duly severing the information exempt from
disclosure are enclosed."



Being dissatisfied, the Appellant bank through its authorized representative filed a
First Appeal dated 07.08.2019.



The FAA order dated 09.11.2021 is as under:-



"It is undisputed fact that the CPIO intends to disclose the information in question
only after duly severing the information exempt from disclosure under 
sections 8

read with 10 of the 
RTI Act
. Further, the duly severed information was shared with
the appellant-banks for filing appeal under section II (3) of the 
RTI Act
. All the
appellant-banks have made general objections against the disclosure, but none of
the appeal shows which specific part of the information proposed to be disclosed
is exempt under section 8 of the RT1 Act. However, the appeal preferred by HDFC
bank alleges certain inconsistences in severing the information by the CPIO. It is
well established that although the 
RTI Act
 is not applicable to the private entities;
it is applicable to the 'information' relating to private entities which is in custody
of the public authorities. After the decision of the Supreme Court of India in the

Reserve Bank of India v. Jayantilal N Alistty [IP No.
 91 of 2015), the grounds raised
by the appellants in these appeals are no more res integra. The issues regarding
commercial confidence, third party information, fiduciary capacity, economic
interest of nation etc are argued before the Supreme Court in
Jaywalk!
 Mistry's Case. The Hon'ble Apex Court has rejected all these arguments.

Article 141
 of the Constitution of India stipulates that the law declared by the
Supreme Court shall be binding on all Courts within the territory of India. Further,
the CPIO intends to disclose the information in question only after duly severing
the information exempt from disclosure under 
sections 8
 read with 10 of the RTI
Ad. In view of this, I find that there is no scope for interference with the
order/notices issued by the CPIO under 
section 11 (3)
 of the RTI Act against all
banks. However, in view of the inconsistences alleged by HDFC bank in respect of
severing information under 
Section 10
 of the RTI Act, the CPIO may once again
verify that there is no such inconsistence, as alleged, in case of severing

                                          3

 information pertaining to HDFC bank before disclosing the intended information in
question. With these observations, all the Appeals preferred by the aforesaid
seven banks are hereby dismissed. This order may be served on the appellant and
all the banks involved in these appeals".



                            CIC/RBIND/A/2022/619816

Information sought:

The RTI applicant Shri Girish Mittal filed an RTI application dated 26.04.2019
seeking the following information:

   (a) "Kindly provide copies of inspection reports of ICICI Bank, AXIS Bank, Yes
       Bank, HDFC Bank & State Bank of India from, Bank of Baroda, Punjab
       National Bank, Union Bank of India from 1st April, 2015 till date.



   (b) Kindly provide copies of any show cause notices issued to banks mentioned
       in point (a), response to the show cause notices and action taken, if any, by
       RBI.



   (c) Kindly provide list of defaulters of loans greater than 50 crores as available
       with RBI.



   (d) Copies of case files with file notings on various irregularities detected by RBI
       in case of Sahara Group of companies and erstwhile Bank of Rajasthan by
       these entities themselves and their known/unknown promoters.



   (e) Kindly provide information on amount spent in form of fees of lawyers, out
       of pocket expenses alongwith any other charges spent by RBI in defending
       the cases against the orders of CIC in High Courts/Supreme Court. Kindly
       provide list giving details in each case or provide copies of challans, invoices,
       bills etc with file notings, approvals et al. This information needs to be
       provided even if it is not available on consolidated basis and spread across
       various files.

   (f) Kindly provide information on the directory of employees of RBI which is
       required to be declared as per 4(1Xb)(1 0) with their email ids. The details
       on website do not give their, mobile phone (if paid by RBI) and email id".



In response, the CPIO vide its letter dated 01.11.2021 issued a notice
 u/s. 11(3)
 of
the RTI Act to the Appellant i.e. Yes Bank Ltd. stating as under:



"Please refer to our letter dated December 03, 2019 wherein we had issued a
notice under 
Section 11(1)
 read with Section 11(2) of the Right to Information Act,

                                           4

 2005 with respect to a RTI request No. RBIND/R/2019/51887 from Shri Girish
Mittal, to enable you to make a written submission as to whether the information
may be disclosed or not along with reasons for exemption from disclosure under
any clause of 
RTI Act, 2005
.



2. After considering your response dated 09.12.2019 to the above notice and in
view of SC Order dated 28.04.2021 dismissing MA No. 2342 of 2019 along with
other MAs filed to recall the judgment passed in Jayantilal Mistry matter dated
16.12.2015, we intend to disclose the Inspection report of your bank for the
financial year 2015-16 to the applicant.



3. Hence, a Notice under 
Section 11(3)
 of the RTI Act 2005 is hereby given
apprising you of the decision taken by CPIO in the matter."



Being dissatisfied, the Appellant bank through its authorized representative filed a
First Appeal dated 29.11.2021. The FAA order dated 03.01.2022 is as under:-



"In order to withhold any information sought by applicants under 
RTI Act
, such
information should fall within any of the exempted items under 
Section 8
 and 
9
 of
the RTI Act. If any part of requested information qualifies for exemption, CPIO
would be free to sever/blackout such part and provide the information. The
exemption under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 is available in respect of YES Bank Limited Appeal
No. RBI AD/A/P/21/00739-LR "personal information" of an individual. The word
'personal information' used in 
section 8(1)(j)
 may not cover the information
relating to a body corporate. If the information includes details of "individuals",
the same may be an exempted information under 
Section 8(1)
0) of the 
RTI Act,
2005
. In view of the aforesaid observations, I find no merit in the appeal which is
liable to be dismissed as such.



The appellant has requested the Appellate Authority to provide personal hearing.
The provisions of 
RTI Act
 do not contemplate a mandatory personal hearing to be
given to the appellant by the First Appellate Authority. Further, the
contentions/grounds of the appellant contained in this appeal have been taken
into consideration, while passing this order. In these circumstances, it is not
considered to be necessary to provide a separate personal hearing to the
appellant and the Appeal is dismissed".



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Appellant bank approached the
Commission with the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

                                         5


 The following were present:-



Appellant: Shri Ashwini Chawla, Advocate representative of Appellant bank
present through Intra Video-Conference.

Respondent: Shri Dinesh Meena, Manager; Shri Abhishek Joshi, AGM and Shri
Prashant Joshi, Manager present through Video-Conference.
RTI applicant: Not Present.



The written submissions of the Respondent and RTI applicant are taken on record.



The representative of the Appellant submitted that the CPIO (RBI) issued a notice
under 
section 11(1)
 of the RTI Act intended to disclose the information. He further
submitted that the relationship of a Bank and its customers is a fiduciary
relationship, which is based on trust and confidence. He further submitted that
the information sought as a whole is exempted from disclosure under 
Section
8(1)(a)
, (d), (e) and (j) of the 
RTI Act
. Further, a similar issue is already pending
before Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in WP(Civil) No. 1469/2019 and WP(Civil)
No. 1159/2019.



The CPIO, during the hearing, reiterated the reply given by the CPIO and FAA and
submitted that the information sought by the RTI applicant in his RTI application
should be disclosed as per 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case.




Decision:



In the facts of the instant case, it is pertinent to note that a decision of a
coordinate bench of the Commission in the matter of various third-party banks vs.
RBI vide File No. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 covers a
detailed discussion inter alia on the same nature of information sought for from
the RBI and the reliance placed by RBI on the 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case. Suffice to say
that the issues raised in the instant case are encapsulated in that same discussion
of the coordinate bench in the following manner:




 
"39. A comprehensive view has to be taken on the objection filed by the
institutions. These objectives has to be deliberated and adjudicated in the light of

Jayantilal Mistry
's case and other judicial pronouncements relevant in such
matter, some of which have been referred by the Commission in the above parts
as well. The Commission while examining various objections realize that the Writ
Petitions filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is seeking directions of
the Supreme Court for non-disclosure of certain aspects of these audit/inspection
report and any such guidance in these Writ Petitions will have direct bearing and

                                         6

 provide further clarity to the CPIO/FAA in adjudicating various aspects of
disclosure/non-disclosure of reports or the information/data which are part of
these reports under the provisions of the 
RTI Act
.
 The Commission takes note that
all the cases/second appeals filed herein are based on interpretations of RBI Vs.
Jayantilal Mistry case and other relevant judicial pronouncements requesting for
full disclosure vis-à-vis with exemptions under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act for non-
disclosure of full or parts of these reports.

        40. In view of the above observations, the Commission is of the view that
the reports generated in the hands of regulatory public authority in discharge of
its statutory obligations are information under 
Section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act, as the
regulator and the regulated entities are not governed by fiduciary relationship.

The orders of the Commission to their effect has been upheld by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's case and the position is unchanged even
today. Various objections filed by banks/financial institutions, to be examined,
analyzed and adjudicated upon, are related to various data and information
submitted to the Reserve Bank of India by these financial institutions explaining
their operations, commercial decisions, clients data etc. under statutory
obligations can be disclosed as such. There are apparently two set of such
information which have been shared by the institutions with the regulator under
statutory obligation. First is the information/data of clients relating to their
business/commercial operations, financial transactions, business and commercial
strategy which is shared by clients with financial institutions in full trust and
confidence and is held by them in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure
under the 
RTI Act
 in their hands. Second set is the information relating to business
strategy, decisions, transactions, other operational data etc. of financial
institutions have been bearing on their competitive position which also enjoys the
exemption from disclosure in their hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise,
under the 
RTI Act
. Some of such data, on case to case basis be sensitive enough for
protection of national interest. The Commission is of the view that the protection
of disclosure of information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of
financial institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in
good faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligation. Various
observations of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's case also does not
indicate so and decision of the regulator to consider redacting such
data/information while disclosing the reports is aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts.

        41. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of
the CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care
has to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making
reasoned order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and later
in the hands of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be required to

                                         7

 adjudicate such RTI applications in the light of the observations of the Commission
afresh. The Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various
objections filed by the Banks and Financial Institutions and submissions made by
applicant to reach the decision in favour or against redaction of various parts of
the report on case to case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry case and other relevant judgments, some of
which have been referred in this order as well. Hence, with these observations the
orders passed by the CPIO and FAA in these matters are set aside and the cases
are being remanded to the CPIO for adjudication afresh. (Emphasis Supplied)

       42. It is amply clear that Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and
others tagged are admitted in Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein guidance and
direction has been sought on non-disclosure of certain type of information which
are essentially the part of the Annual Inspection Report/RAR, etc. These petitions
also seek protection of interim communication between regulator and the
regulated entity in the process of finalization of these reports or otherwise. It is
obvious that decision in these Writ Petitions will provide clarity and guidance to
the Public Authority on redaction/non-disclosure of a set of information inspite of
being part of these reports which are open to disclosure. At this stage, any
decision by the Public Authority will amount to pre-judging the issues pending
admitted Writ Petitions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Various banks,
financial institutions, respondent public authority and the RTI applicant have
already impleaded party and are presenting their arguments before the Apex
Court.

       43. Hence, any decision of redaction or disclosure of information, without
waiting for decision in the Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged may cause irrevocable damage against right of privacy and protection of
commercial interest. Hence, the respondent public authority if expedient may
wait for the outcome in Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged or seek clarification from the Hon'ble Court and accordingly decide these
RTI applications by following process as enumerated in the earlier paras by the
Commission in the interest of principles of natural justice. While disclosing the
information they should be cautious in taking a considerate view balancing right
to privacy, protection of national and commercial interest on one hand vis-à-vis
larger public interest. (Emphasis Supplied)

 
44. It is further observed that similar view has also been taken by the
Division Bench of the Commission in file bearing nos. CIC/VS/A/2013/001488 and
CIC/VS/A/2013/001805 dated 11.05.2017 wherein the Commission observed that
'Having considered the submissions of both the parties, the Commission observes
that since a similar issue is pending adjudication before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the matter of Central for 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. &Ors.
, it would be judicious to await the final

                                         8

 outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court. However, on receipt of the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter, the appellant shall be at
liberty to file second appeal afresh, if he so desires. The instant appeals are
disposed of'."




The above decision is therefore applicable to the instant case and no separate line
of adjudication is warranted in the matter. The stipulations contained in File No.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 stands endorsed to the
Respondent CPIO with emphasis on para 41 & 43 supplied as above .



                    The appeals are disposed of accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                        9