[Cites 
16
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Gita Dewan Verma vs Department Of Personnel & Training on 27 June, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               sके ीय सूचना आयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                            बाबागंगनाथमाग, मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नईिद    ी, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/DOP&T/A/2022/641831
          CIC/DOP&T/C/2022/641830

Gita Dewan Verma                                         ......अपीलकता/Appellant
                                                      ....िशकायतकता/Complainant


                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम

CPIO,
Department of Personnel &
Training, RTI Cell, North
Block, New Delhi-110001.                              .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                   :   26/04/2023
Date of Decision                  :   26/06/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

Note: The above referred matters have been clubbed for hearing and decision
as these are based on RTI Applications seeking the same information from the
CPIOs falling under the jurisdiction of the same public authority.

Relevant facts emerging from appeal/Complaint:

RTI application filed on          :   09/05/2022 & 13/05/2022
CPIO replied on                   :   23/05/2022 & 08/06/2022
First appeal filed on             :   25/05/2022 & 08/06/2022
First Appellate Authority order   :   23/06/2022 & 07/07/2022

                                        1
 2nd Appeal/Complaint dated        :   31/07/2022 & 31/07/2022

                              CIC/DOP&T/C/2022/641830

Information sought
:

The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 09.02.2022 seeking the following
information:



"Please see entry no. 1556 on Page-270 of the Annual Report of the CIC that is
published at:

https://cic.gov.in/sites/default/files/Reports/Eng-AR2020-21.pdf wherein Central
Information Commission is listed as PA of Department of Personnel and Training
(DOPT) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.

Please also see the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules published
on Cabinet Secretariat website at:

https://cabsec.gov.in/allocationofbusinessrules/order/ . Rule 2 therein requires all
GOI departments (Ministries, Departments, Secretariats and Offices) to be
specified in First Schedule and Rule 3(1) requires the distribution of subjects
among the departments to be specified in Second Schedule and to include all
attached and subordinate offices or other organisations concerned with their
subjects.          Second           Schedule        is        published          at
https://cabsec.gov.in/allocationofbusinessrules/secondschedule/ with subjects
allocated to DOPT at pages-130 to 133, wherein neither Central Information
Commission nor the 
Right to Information Act
 is specified.



Therefore, please provide copy of any relevant record showing that the Central
Information Commission is attached to DOPT and that DOPT has been duly
allocated the functions of Appropriate Government / Central Government under
the 
Right to Information Act, 2005
."



The CPIO furnished a reply to the Complainant on 23.05.2022 stating as under:-



"File regarding constitution of Central Information Commission as well as
composition of Central Information Commission and appointment of Central
Information Commissioner and Information Commissioner is available on the
website of this Department at link below: dopt.gov.in-RTI-Important files of IR
Division-1/7/2005-IR"



                                         2


 Being dissatisfied, the Complainant filed a First Appeal dated 25.05.2022 stating
inter alia as under:



FAA's order dated 23.06.2022, upheld the reply of CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, appellant/complainant approached the
Commission with the instant Complaint stating inter alia as under:



        "A. I have clear cause for Complaint
 u/s 18(1)(b)
 because I have been
refused access to duly requested copy by all concerned DOPT RTI officers:

(i) DOPT Nodal Officer forwarded to IR Division and failed to withdraw the
forwarding on my request by email dated 09/05/22;

(ii) DOPT IR-2 Section CPIO 'disposed of' my request with online Reply that neither
provided the requested (or any) copy nor refused it for a reason from
 u/s 8
 or 9 -

i.e., 'Reply' that bore no relation to the decision
 u/s 7
 to which I am entitled;



                                        3


 (iii) DOPT IR Division FAA 'disposed of' my appeal with online Reply that vaguely
said CPIO's Reply seems to be in order, without addressing my appeal grounds and
requests - i.e., 'Reply' that discharged no appellate duty owed to me
 u/s 19
.

        B. I have cause for Complaint
 u/s 18(1)(e)
 because, instead of being
provided the requested copy, I was pointed to one of the 'Important Files of IR
Division' that does not have the information sought. Further, nearly all 'Important
Files of IR Division' are those in which appointment of CIC and ICs were processed

- i.e., unrelated to functions of Appropriate Government
 u/s 26
 & 
27
.

        Only 3 'Important Files of IR Division' relate to functions of Appropriate
Government and it is unclear how those are IR Division files because they all relate
to 
section 26(1)(c)
 and 
section 26(1)(c)
 is not reflected in IR Division's work
allotment."



                           CIC/DOP&T/A/2022/641831

Information sought:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 13.05.2022 seeking the following
information:



"Please see entry no. 1556 on Page-270 of the Annual Report of the CIC that is
published at https://cic.gov.in/sites/default/files/Reports/Eng-AR2020-21.pdf
wherein Central Information Commission is listed as PA of Department of
Personnel and Training (DOPT) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions. Please also see the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules
published on Cabinet Secretariat website at:

 https://cabsec.gov.in/allocationofbusinessrules/order/ . Rule 2 therein requires all
GOI departments (Ministries, Departments, Secretariats and Offices) to be
specified in First Schedule and Rule 3(1) requires the distribution of subjects
among the departments to be specified in Second Schedule and to include all
attached and subordinate offices or other organisations concerned with their
subjects. Second Schedule is published at:

https://cabsec.gov.in/allocationofbusinessrules/secondschedule/with         subjects
allocated to DOPT at pages-130 to 133, wherein neither Central Information
Commission nor the 
Right to Information Act
 is specified.



Therefore, please provide copy of any relevant record showing that the Central
Information Commission is attached to DOPT and that DOPT has been duly
allocated the functions of Appropriate Government / Central Government under
the 
Right to Information Act, 2005
."

                                         4


 The CPIO furnished a reply to the appellant on 08.06.2022 stating as under:



      "As far as the information sought regarding relevant record showing that
CIC is attached to DoPT, please find attached a copy of the notification of
constitution of CIC as per available records."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 08.06.2022 stating as
under:



FAA's order dated 07.07.2022, upheld the reply of CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, appellant/complainant approached the
Commission with the instant Second Appeal stating inter alia as under:



      "A. CPIO provided INCOMPLETE response saying nothing about second part
of my request (Ground II in first appeal) and INCORRECT information for first part
of my request (Ground I in first appeal).

      B. FAA disposed of my first appeal without addressing its specific grounds
and requests, with vague decision that CPIO's response seems to be in order, for
the reason that "CPIO has provided the information available in the Division". The
reason is extraneous and untenable because the request was not addressed to IR


                                        5

 Division either
 u/s 6(1)
 or
 u/s 6(3)
 and I had specifically requested its return to RTI
Cell / Nodal Officer, saying that the information was being OBSTRUCTED by its
processing in IR Division (Ground B in my first appeal).

       C. DOPT IR Division FAA's decision by way of online Reply instead of proper
order, vaguely saying CPIO's response seems to be in order instead of addressing
the specific grounds of appeal against it has been issued to me not only in the
present matter but also in prior matters pending before the Commission as well as
in the matter in which I am approaching in accompanying Complaint."



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing through intra-video conferencing:

The following were present:-



Appellant/Complainant: 'Present but NOT ATTENDING' along with 'Dr.Sarabjit
Roy, READER for Appellant.' (Verbatim extract from the attendance sheet)
Respondent: D.S.S. Srinivasa Rao, US & CPIO.



At the outset, the Commission finds it expedient to bring on record that in the
presence of the Appellant, Dr.Sarabjit Roy, 'READER for Appellant' was heard at
length in connection with the instant set of cases as well as 4 other appeal(s)
listed for hearing simultaneously. The larger part of the hearing proceedings were
centred around the objection of the Appellant and her Reader with regard to the
alleged deficiencies in the intra-video conferencing system as they repeatedly
insisted that the bench was not audible to them at all; their demand to know the
credentials of each of the staff that were assisting the bench during the hearing
proceedings and even objecting to the presence of some of these staff; providing
unsolicited advice and suggestions as to how the bench should conduct the
hearing proceedings; how the staff attached with the bench shall conduct
themselves etc.

The Commission took on record the expansive written objections of the Appellant
against clubbing of the instant two cases by the bench and demanding it to be
unlisted among other objections about not listing her cases as per her desired
chronology; as also her inability to present her case due to being 'sleep deprived'
from filing written submissions in some 9 cases listed to be heard in the
Commission around the same time as the instant case and also objected to the
non-submission of any written arguments by the DoPT.



Dr. Sarabjit Roy, 'READER for Appellant' also mentioned about being a third party
in the instant set of cases amongst 15 others, listed in a written document filed by

                                          6

 him prior to the hearing, relevant contents of which are reproduced hereunder
for reference:



        "We are all third parties by virtue of definitions in the 
RTI Act
 2005 as we are all (a) person other
than the citizen making a request for information, and also (b) have made representations to the CPIO or
Public Authority, (c) The CPIO has agreed to provide hundreds, if not thousands, of pages of information
relating to the aforementioned third parties which were mostly submitted in strict confidence to the
public authority with clear and prominent cautions that these highly confidential filings by all of us not be
disclosed to anyone outside of the Central Government to whom the business of 
RTI Act
 is allocated. I
say, that the CPIO has erred in not considering our representations
 u/s 11
 and also the numerous
representations concerning confidentiality in framing of the RTI rules since 2006 onwards. It is highly
pertinent that the undersigned is the contesting Respondent against CIC in the Supreme Court in the
matter of framing of RTI Rules and it is a highly serious matter how the very important and permanent
record files relating to framing of Rules under 
RTI Act
 have gone missing on several occasions, especially
when this matter is pending in Supreme Court of India. Because these filings relate to the years 2005
onwards and concern documents of a permanent nature which are to be carefully preserved for posterity
in the National Archives, and because we the above mentioned third parties apprehend that the CPIO /
Public Authority is malafidely attempting to defame and tarnish our public reputations by circulating
fabricated / tampered documents at the behest of foreign / enemy powers who are out to destroy the
unity and integrity of India, I am circulating the present NOTICE to all concerned third parties to either
appear in person on the said date / matters or else to authorise the undersigned to represent your
respective organisations before the Commission. As time is short and many 3rd parties are out of Delhi,
eg. Nagpur, Kollam, Ahmednagar, Kolkata etc, kindly send your authority in favour of the undersigned by
email to the addressee Shri C.A. Joseph at the Central Information Commission with cc to myself.



        xxx

         In addition there are at least 20 other linked files relating to formation of RTI rules since 2005 tiil
date which the Appellant has sought and which relate to / have information supplied by us in confidence.
I therefore request you to kindly issue formal hearing notice to all concerned third parties as required by
s/s 19(4) of the 
RTI Act
 2005. In so far as the undersigned is concerned I shall be appearing in person, for
myself and all persons who authorise me to act for them in the chamber of Ms. Saroj Punhani."



Pertinently so, the above third-party aspect has been placed on record in
another Appeal of the Appellant that was heard today vide File No.
CIC/DOP&T/A/2022/642167 but attendance of third parties as marked by Dr.
Sarabjit Roy in File No. CIC/DOP&T/A/2022/642167 is not found in the
attendance sheet of the instant case, therefore it is not sure if this was linked as
link paper to the instant case inadvertently.



As for the specific arguments related to the information sought for, the same
were an extrapolation of the grounds of First Appeal, Complaint and Second
Appeal, all of which are already mentioned above.



                                                       7


 As for the Respondent, the replies already available on record were reiterated by
the CPIO.



Decision:



At the outset, the arguments tendered for listing/un-listing/chronology jump
issues of the cases are summarily rejected as these appear to be no substance;
far stretched and laborious, seemingly to obstruct or prolong the disposal of the
cases by the Commission. Moreover, the manner and extent of the persistent
arguments of Dr.Sarabjit Roy with intermittent inputs from the Appellant
ludicrously going all out against the technicalities of the intra-video
conferencing system and against the staff attached with the registry appeared
to sabotage the entire hearing proceedings and is viewed adversely by the
bench.



The Commission further observes that the information sought for in the RTI
Application does not conform to 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act as it requires the CPIO
to deduce and provide his opinion about the supposed availability of "any
relevant record". The Appellant shall note that outstretching the interpretation of

Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act to include deductions and inferences to be drawn by
the CPIO is unwarranted as it casts immense pressure on the CPIOs to ensure that
they provide the correct deduction/inference to avoid being subject to penal
provisions under the 
RTI Act
. For the sake of clarity, the provision of 
Section 2(f)

of the RTI Act is reproduced hereunder:



      "2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--

       (f) "information" means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;.."

In this regard, the Appellant's attention is drawn towards a judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court on the scope and ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act in the
matter of CBSE vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors.[CIVIL APPEAL NO.6454 of
2011]wherein it was held as under:



                                         8


 
"35. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some misconceptions about
the 
RTI Act
. 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and
existing.........A public authority is also not required to furnish information which
require drawing of inferences and/or making of assumptions. It is also not
required to provide `advice' or `opinion' to an applicant, nor required to obtain
and furnish any `opinion' or `advice' to an applicant. The reference to `opinion'
or `advice' in the definition of `information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers
to such material available in the records of the public authority. Many public
authorities have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and
opinion to the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused
with any obligation under the 
RTI Act
." (Emphasis Supplied)

Further for better understating of the scope and ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI
Act, reference may be had of 
Khanapuram Gandaiah vs Administrative Officer
&Ors. [SLP (CIVIL) NO.34868 OF
 2009], wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court held
as under:




      "7....Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material which is
not before him; or any information he could have obtained under law.
Under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such information
which can be accessed by the "public authority" under any other law for the time
being in force. The answers sought by the petitioner in the application could not
have been with the public authority nor could he have had access to this
information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged to give any reasons as to
why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was before him...."

(Emphasis Supplied)

And, in the matter of 
Dr. Celsa Pinto, Ex-Officio Joint Secretary,(School
Education) vs. The Goa State Information Commission
 [2008 (110) Bom L R
1238], the Hon'ble Bombay High Court held as under:




      "..... In the first place, the Commission ought to have noticed that the Act
confers on the citizen the right to information. Information has been defined
by 
Section 2(f)
 as follows.



                                          9


 
Section 2(f)
 -Information means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;

      The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the question why
which would be the same thing as asking the reason for a justification for a
particular thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot expect to
communicate to the citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not done
in the sense of a justification because the citizen makes a requisition about
information. Justifications are matter within the domain of adjudicating
authorities and cannot properly be classified as information." (Emphasis
Supplied)

In addition to the above observations, it is pertinent to note that even the
grounds of the First Appeal, Complaint and Second Appeal are more in the nature
of expressing conjecture and adducing the possibilities of finding a record holder
or questioning the unavailability of the record of this nature, in a manner that
knowingly or unknowingly seeks to mortify the CPIOs without even asking for
what is prescribed as "information" in the 
RTI Act
.



Having observed as above, the Commission is not in a position to provide for any
relief in the matter under Second Appeal or to call into question the
action/inaction of the CPIO(s) based on their wisdom and understanding of the
RTI queries under Complaint.



Similarly, the Commission is absolutely at a loss to comprehend the stake of so
called third parties in the instant matter as placed on record by Dr. Sarabjit Roy,
"READER" of the Appellant.



              The Complaint and Appeal are dismissed accordingly.




                                                  Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                      Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु        )



                                        10

 Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स"ािपत ित)


(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पं जीयक
िदनां क /





                                 11