[Cites 
16
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Samir Sardana vs Department Of Personnel & Training on 27 October, 2022


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/DOP&T/A/2021/632086 +
          CIC/DOP&T/A/2021/634185

Samir Sardana                                           ......अपीलकता /Appellant


                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम

CPIO,
Department of Personnel &
Training, RTI Cell, North
Block, New Delhi-110001.                                .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                     :   28/06/2022
Date of Decision                    :   20/10/2022

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :              Saroj Punhani

Note: The above referred Appeal(s) have been clubbed for decision as these are
based on the same RTI Application.

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on            :   25/02/2021
CPIO(s) replied on                  :   17/06/2021 & 25/06/2021
First appeal filed on               :   30/06/2021 & 01/07/2021
First Appellate Authority's order   :   15/07/2021 & 21/07/2021
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated          :   NIL


Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 25.02.2021 with the CPIO, Ministry of
Home Affairs seeking the following information:

                                          1


 "4.1. Information is sought w.r.t the following persons
   • PUNYA SALLA SRIVASTAVA
4.2. The Following information is sought w.r.t the above stated persons:
Type A
·Dates of Any Training done (by the above stated persons in Para 4.1., with respect
to 
RTI Act
 and related matters in the last 5 years

-Nature and Dates of any quasi-judicial functions conducted by the abovesaid
person, under any law in India, in the last 3 years

- Number, Dates and CIC Reference no. of all 2nd appeals filed against the FAA
orders passed by the above stated person in Para 4.1., in the last 5 years
Type B
   • Date of Appointment/Deputation into the IAS
   • Category of Appointment into the Service of the IAS (Regular/OBC/SC/ST
       etc.)
   • Date of Age Related Retirement from the IAS
   • Copy of Appointment Letter into the IAS
   • Photo as per Application Form on Form of Recruitment
   • Photo as per Application Form on Form of USPC examination
   • Name of person at the time of joining the IAS
   • Photo as per Application Form on Service Book (Old, New and Updated
       Service Books)

Type C
   • Educational Qualifications at the time of joining the IAS
   • Educational Qualifications acquired after joining the IAS
   • Training (Name, Nature, Institution, Nation, Location and Dates) received
      from the date of joining the IAS
   • Positions, Ranks, Transfers, Deputation, Stations and Departments served
      from the date of entry into the IAS
   • Copies of Mark sheets of the 10th,12th standard and the Graduate and
      Post Graduate level
   • Language of education (in terms of teaching and written examinations) of
      the 10th,12th standard and the Graduate and Post Graduate level
   • PIO to indicate if the above stated persons were at any time the subject of
      any criminal proceedings initiated by any law enforcement agency, in the
      last 7 years (year by year)
   • PIO to indicate if the above stated persons were at any time the subject of
      ENQUIRY OR INVESTIGATION initiated by any law enforcement agency, in
      the last 7 years (year by year)


                                         2

    • PIO to indicate if the above stated persons were at any time actioned under
     The Discipline & Appeal Rules in the last 7 years (year by year)
   • PIO to indicate if the above stated persons were at any time placed under
     suspension, in the last 7 years (year by year)
   • PIO to indicate if the above stated persons were at any time placed under
     suspension, as they were engaged in activities prejudicial to the interest of
     the security of the state, in the last 7 years (year by year)

   Type D
   ·Certified Copies of the CR/ACR for last 5 years
   ·Certified Copies of the censures, penalties and strictures from date of
   appointment into the service of the IAS
   ·Certified Copies of the 1st Page of the Service Book
   ·Details of all Complaints made against the above stated persons w.r.t number,
   date of complaint and name of complainant and date of disposal (
Section 10

   can be applied to name of complainant - if required) for the last 5 years
   ·Number and Dates of Increments of the above stated persons from the date of
   inception of service
   ·Names of the Persons who appraised and sanctioned the Increments of the
   above stated persons in the IAS
   ·Number and Dates of Promotions of the above stated persons from the date of
   inception of service with the GOI in the IAS
   ·Names of the Persons who appraised and sanctioned the Promotions of the
   above stated persons in the IAS

4.3.RTI Applicant would like to inspect the Service Book (Old, New and Updated)
and Personnel Files of the person named in Para 4.1 above, as also , photograph
any document or record therein."



The CPIO, EO(PR), DoPT replied to the Appellant on 17.06.2021 stating as under:



      "Please refer to your RTI application dated 12.04.2021 which has been
received on its transfer from the M/o Home Affairs vide letter no. 15015/22/2021-
LC dated 18.05.2021 and a copy of this has further been marked to the
undersigned by the RTI cell of this Department vide R.No.- DOP&T/R/P/21/01202
dated 28.05.2021

      2. It may be noted that under the 
RTI Act
, only such information can be
supplied which already exists and is held by the Public Authority or held under the
control of the Public Authority. The Public Information Officer is not supposed to
create information; or to interpret information; or to give non existing opinion/
advice on problems raised by the applicants.

                                        3


        3. The undersigned CP10 is concerned with information sought in point no.1
of Type D of your RTI applicant. It may be mentioned in this regard that while
examining the provisions of clause (j) of 
section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act (in SLP (C) No.
27734 of 2012 (@ CC 14781/2012)), the Supreme Court has observed vide order
dated 03 10 2012:

       "13. The performance of an employee/officer in an organization is primarily
a matter between the employee and the employer and normally those aspects are
governed by the services rules which fall under the expression 'personal
information", the disclosure of which has no relationship to any public activity or
public interest. On the other hand, the disclosure of which would cause
unwarranted invasion of privacy of that individual. Of course, in a given case, if
the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer of the
Appellate Authority is satisfied that the larger public Interest justifies the
disclosure of such information, appropriate order could be passed but the
petitioner cannot claim those details as a matter of right."

       "15: The petitioner in the instant case has not made a bona fide public
interest in seeking information, the disclosure of such information would cause
unwarranted invasion of privacy of the individual under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI
Act,."

       4. In view of the above, no information with regards to your RTI application
can be provided."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 30.06.2021. FAA's order
dated 15.07.2021 upheld the reply of CPIO.



CIC/DOP&T/A/2021/634185

The CPIO furnished a reply to the appellant on 25.06.2021 stating as follows:-



       "Please refer to your RTI application dated 12.04.2021 received on transfer
from the Ministry of Home Affairs, vide their letter No. 15015/22/2021-LC dated
18.05.2021 [Registration No. DOP&T/RIP/21/01204 dated 28.05.2021] under the
provisions of 
RTI Act, 2005
. In this regard, it is informed that thisthis CPIO deals
with Service allocation, Cadre allocation and medical examination of the
candidates recommended by UPSC on the basis of Civil Services Examination. Thus,
information sought only under 'TYPE B' (except point no. 08) of your RTI
application pertains to this CPIO.



2. In this regard, in respect of point nos. 01, 02 and 03 under 'Type B' of your
application, it is informed that the bio-data of the concerned officer is available on
the website of this Department at following link:



                                          4


                   http://supremo.nic.in/knowyourofficerlAs.aspx.



3. In respect of point no. 04 under 'Type B' of your application, a copy of the
appointment letter issued to the candidates allocated to lAS on the basis of Civil
Services Examination 1992 (including Ms. Punya Salila Srivastava) is enclosed.

4. In respect of point no. 07 under 'Type B' of your application, it is informed that
the name of concerned person at the time of joining the lAS is Punya Salila
Srivastava.

5. Further, in respect of point nos. 05 and 06 under 'Type B' of your application, it
is mentioned that the information sought by you falls under "personal
information", the disclosure of which has no relationship to any public activity or
bonafide public interest and the disclosure of such information would cause
unwarranted invasion of privacy of the individual. Therefore, the same cannot be
provided under the provisions of 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 01.07.2021. FAA's order
dated 21.07.2021 upheld the reply of CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, appellant approached the Commission with the
instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present through video conference.

Respondent: B L Meena, ASO and Vipin Kumar, ASO, Reps. of CPIO, EO(PR) along
with Anshuman Mishra, US & CPIO (AIS-I), DoPT present through intra-video
conference.

The Appellant stated that the CPIOs have not responded to all the points of his
RTI Application and harped extensively on the aspect that Part A, B, C, D of his RTI
Application has been either responded to partially or not replied to at all and on
this count, he seeks penalty to be imposed on the CPIOs. He further insisted that
he does not agree with the CPIO 's view that the information sought for by him is
personal information of a third party and also argued that even if the CPIO were
to invoke 
Section 8(1)(j)
, he could have sought for the consent of the third party.
In furtherance of these arguments, the Appellant was heard at length arguing on
the same lines as that of his written submissions stating as under in File No.
CIC/DOP&T/A/2021/632086:



      " THE PIO HAS NOT MADE A REPLY TO THE FOLLOWING QUERIES


                                         5

        •Dates of Any Training done (by the abovestated persons in Para 4.1., with
respect to 
RTI Act
 and related matters in the last 5 years

       -Nature and Dates of any quasi-judicial functions conducted by the abovesaid
person, under any law in India, in the last 3 years

       - Number, Dates and CIC Reference no.of all 2nd appeals filed against the
FAA orders passed by the above stated person in Para 4.1., in the last 5 years
       •Certified Copies of the 1st Page of the Service Book
       •Details of all Complaints made against the above stated persons w.r.t
number, date of complaint and name of complainant and date of disposal (
Section
10
 can be applied to name of complainant - if required) for the last 5 years
       •Number and Dates of Increments of the above stated persons from the date
of inception of service
       •Names of the Persons who appraised and sanctioned the Increments of the
above stated persons in the IAS
       •Number and Dates of Promotions of the above stated persons from the
date of inception of service with the GOI in the IAS
       •Names of the Persons who appraised and sanctioned the Promotions of the
above stated persons in the IAS
       •PIO to indicate if the above stated persons were at any time the subject of
any criminal proceedings initiated by any law enforcement agency, in the last 7
years (year by year)
       •PIO to indicate if the above stated persons were at any time the subject of
ENQUIRY OR INVESTIGATION initiated by any law enforcement agency, in the last 7
years (year by year)
       •PIO to indicate if the above stated persons were at any time actioned under
The Discipline & Appeal Rules in the last 7 years (year by year)
       •PIO to indicate if the above stated persons were at any time placed under
suspension, in the last 7 years (year by year)
       •PIO to indicate if the above stated persons were at any time placed under
suspension, as they were engaged in activities prejudicial to the interest of the
security of the state, in the last 7 years (year by year)
        THE PIO HAS MADE AN ILLEGAL AND MALAFIDE REJECTION U/S 8(1)(J) OF
THE RTI ACT, WHEN THE SUPREMO WEBSITE HAS THE ENTIRE CHRONOLOGY OF
THIS WOMAN ON ITS PORTAL (ANNEXURE 1)

      xxx

      4.1. In the Appeal, the Appellant had sought Penalty and Administrative
action, on the PIO
 u/s 20(1)
 and (2) of the 
RTI Act,2005

      o THERE HAS TO BE A PENALTY ON THE PIO FOR MAKING A NON- REPLY
AFTER 130 DAYS


                                        6

       o THERE HAS TO BE A PENALTY ON THE PIO FOR MAKING A ILLEGAL
REJECTION U/S 8(1)(J) OF THE RTI ACT
      4.2. The Appellant impleads with the CIC, to impose a penalty of Rs. 25,000/-

against the CPIO
 u/s 20 (1)
 of the RTI Act and recommend to the Public Authority,
to take suitable action against the PIO, under the provisions of THE service and
conduct rules of KRC staff"



Similarly, the sum and substance of the Appellant's arguments with respect to the
information sought for in File No. CIC/DOP&T/A/2021/634185 can be gathered
from the below mentioned grounds of appeal:



       "4.1.The Grounds for Relief against the PIO, are summarized , as under:
       Ground of PIO - No.1
        The PIO has MADE AN ILLEGAL REJECTION OF ALMOST THE ENTIRE
APPLICATION U/S 8(1)(J) OF THE RTI ACT - W/O STATING WHICH INFORMATION
HAS BEEN SO REJECTED AND THE BASIS AND REASONING OF THE SAME
       Ground of PIO - No.2
        The PIO has MADE AN ILLEGAL REJECTION OF THE ENTIRE APPLICATION
U/S 8(1)(J) AS THE INFORMATION SOUGHT IS NOT PERSONAL AND HAS NO
INVASION OF PRIVACY, AS THE SAID DATA IS DISCLOSED ON GOI PORTALS FOR IAS
OFFICERS, RPF STAFF AND RAILWAY STAFF MADE AN ILLEGAL REJECTION U/S 8(1)
(J)OF THE RTI ACT - AND SO, WHY CAN THIS INFORMATION NOT BE SHARED FOR
THIS IAS OFFICER

     Ground of PIO - No.3
      SEVERAL POLICE FORCES HAVE DISCLOSED THE DATE OF BIRTH,
TRANSFERS, POSTINGS, AWARDS, INCREMENTS, EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS,
AND DATE OF JOINING OF IPS OFFICERS, ON THEIR PORTALS, AND SO THE DATA IS
NOT PERSONAL AND THERE IS NO INVASION OF PRIVACY.

      THEREFORE, HOW CAN THE INFORMATION SOUGHT FOR THE IAS OFFICER
BE DEEMED TO BE PERSONAL INFORMATION

       Ground of PIO - No.4
        The Information Sought by the applicant is required to SUE THE IAS STAFF
AND THE INDIAN STATE FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF
THE APPLICANT IN CHAPTER 3 OF THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION AND THE ICCPR AND
ICESCR Conventions of the UN (to which this nation is a signatory and a ratifying
entity), AND FOR THEIR SERVICE RECORD AND PAST PATTERNS OF ILLEGAL AND
UNETHICAL CONDUCT, WHICH HAVE TO BE REVIEWED"



                                        7


 B L Meena, ASO & Rep. of CPIO(ER) reiterated the reply provided to the Appellant
on 17.06.2021 while Anshuman Mishra, US & CPIO (AIS-I), DoPT reiterated the
reply provided to the Appellant on 25.06.2021.



Further, responding to the Appellant's persistent argument that the CPIOs did not
reply to most of the points of the RTI Application as well as in response to
conjecture expressed with respect to the service book of the averred employee,
the Respondent CPIOs affirmed that the service book is maintained by the cadre
controlling authority which in this case ought to be the MHA.



The Appellant interjected to state that nobody in MHA has the time to read RTI
Applications carefully. Lastly, the Appellant desired to insist on the larger public
interest pertinent in the disclosure of the information as explained in his First
Appeal & Second Appeal.



Decision:



The Commission at the outset observes that the information sought for in the
instant RTI Application is squarely exempt from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of
the RTI Act as it relates to the service record of a third party. It is pertinent to
note that in some places the Appellant has also sought for clarifications and
confirmation of facts related to the said third party. For the sake of clarity, the
said exemption of 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act is reproduced as under:



      "Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there shall be no
obligation to give any citizen:



       (j) information which relates to personal information the disclosure of which
has no relationship to any public activity or interest, or which would cause
unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual unless the Central Public
Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer or the appellate
authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that the larger public interest justifies
the disclosure of such information:.."



In this regard, the attention of the Appellant is further drawn towards a judgment
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of Central Public Information Officer,
Supreme Court of 
India Vs. Subhash Chandra Agarwal
 in Civil Appeal No. 10044
of 2010 with Civil Appeal No. 10045 of 2010 and Civil Appeal No. 2683 of 2010
wherein the import of "personal information" envisaged under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of
RTI Act has been exemplified in the context of earlier ratios 
laid down by
 the

                                         8

 same Court in the matter(
s) of Canara Bank Vs. C.S. Shyam
 in Civil Appeal No.22
of 2009; 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande vs. Central Information Commissioner &
Ors.
, (2013) 1 SCC 212 and R.K. Jain vs. Union of India & Anr., (2013) 14 SCC 794.
The following was thus held:




       "59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion, would
indicate that personal records, including name, address, physical, mental and
psychological status, marks obtained, grades and answer sheets, are all treated as
personal information. Similarly, professional records, including qualification,
performance, evaluation reports, ACRs, disciplinary proceedings, etc. are all
personal information. Medical records, treatment, choice of medicine, list of
hospitals and doctors visited, findings recorded, including that of the family
members, information relating to assets, liabilities, income tax returns, details of
investments, lending and borrowing, etc. are personal information. Such personal
information is entitled to protection from unwarranted invasion of privacy and
conditional access is available when stipulation of larger public interest is
satisfied. This list is indicative and not exhaustive..."



Further, the Commission is unable to comprehend the aspect of larger public
interest being argued in the matter by the Appellant and in not inclined to
intervene with the reply of the CPIO. In this regard, the Commission places
reliance on a catena of judgments of the superior Courts on the import of "public
interest" as under:



The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
Bihar Public Service Commission vs.
Saiyed Hussain Abbas Rizwi & Anr. [CIVIL APPEAL NO.9052 OF
 2012] observed as
under:




 
"23. The expression 'public interest' has to be understood in its true
connotation so as to give complete meaning to the relevant provisions of the Act.
The expression 'public interest' must be viewed in its strict sense with all its
exceptions so as to justify denial of a statutory exemption in terms of the Act. In its
common parlance, the expression 'public interest', like 'public purpose', is not
capable of any precise definition. It does not have a rigid meaning, is elastic and
takes its colour from the statute in which it occurs, the concept varying with time
and state of society and its needs. [
State of Bihar v. Kameshwar Singh
 (AIR 1952
SC 252)]. It also means the general welfare of the public that warrants
recommendation and protection; something in which the public as a whole has a
stake [Black's Law Dictionary (Eighth Edition)]. Emphasis Supplied


                                          9

        "24. The satisfaction has to be arrived at by the authorities objectively and
the consequences of such disclosure have to be weighed with regard to
circumstances of a given case. The decision has to be based on objective
satisfaction recorded for ensuring that larger public interest outweighs
unwarranted invasion of privacy or other factors stated in the provision. Certain
matters, particularly in relation to appointment, are required to be dealt with
great confidentiality."


 
".... Similarly, there may be cases where the disclosure has no relationship
to any public activity or interest or it may even cause unwarranted invasion of
privacy of the individual. All these protections have to be given their due
implementation as they spring from statutory exemptions. It is not a decision
simpliciter between private interest and public interest. It is a matter where a
constitutional protection is available to a person with regard to the right to
privacy. Thus, the public interest has to be construed while keeping in mind the
balance factor between right to privacy and right to information with the
purpose sought to be achieved and the purpose that would be served in the
larger public interest, particularly when both these rights emerge from the
constitutional values under the Constitution of India." Emphasis Supplied
Similarly, in another judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
S. P.
Gupta v President of India
, [AIR 1982 SC 149], with reference to 'public interest' it
has been maintained that:




 
"Redressing public injury, enforcing public duty, protecting social, collective,
'diffused' rights and interests vindicate public interest... [in the enforcement of
which] the public or a class of the community have pecuniary interest or some
interest by which their legal rights or liabilities are affected." Emphasis Supplied

And, in the matter of 
State of Gujarat vs. Mirzapur Moti Kureshi Kasab Jamat &
others
 [Appeal (Civil) 4937-4940 of 1998], the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held
that:




      "the interest of general public (public interest) is of a wide importance
covering public order, public health, public security, morals, economic welfare of
the community, and the objects mentioned in Part IV of the Constitution [i.e.
Directive Principles of State Policy]". Emphasis Supplied

Notably, the argument of the Appellant that the CPIO should have sought for the
consent of the third party stands bereft of merit as 
Section 11
 of the RTI Act
provides for seeking consent of the third party when the CPIO 'intends' to disclose


                                          10

 the information related to the third party and here, it is clear beyond reasonable
doubt that the CPIO intended to deny the information.



Adverting to the foregoing observations, the Commission is also not inclined to
proceed adversely against the CPIO for not having responded to each of the
"Parts" of the RTI Application or call into question the merits of the transfer of the
RTI Application under Section 6(3) of the RTI Act from MHA to DoPT or the role of
MHA, per se.



The mere omission of the CPIOs to reply to each 'Part' & point of the RTI
Application in the instant case does not suggest any malafides based on the
strength of the material on record, more particularly in view of the explanation
tendered by the CPIOs during the hearing regarding not being the record holder
for the remaining points. Here, the attention of the Appellant is drawn towards a
judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the matter of 
Registrar of Companies
& Ors v. Dharmendra Kumar Garg & Anr
. [W.P.(C) 11271/2009] dated 01.06.2012
wherein it was held:




       " 61. It can happen that the PIO may genuinely and bonafidely entertain the
belief and hold the view that the information sought by the querist cannot be
provided for one or the other reasons. Merely because the CIC eventually finds
that the view taken by the PIO was not correct, it cannot automatically lead to
issuance of a showcause notice under 
Section 20
 of the RTI Act and the imposition
of penalty. The legislature has cautiously provided that only in cases of malafides
or unreasonable conduct, i.e., where the PIO, without reasonable cause refuses to
receive the application, or provide the information, or knowingly gives incorrect,
incomplete or misleading information or destroys the information, that the
personal penalty on the PIO can be imposed...."



Similarly, an observation of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the matter of 
Bhagat
Singh vs. CIC & Ors. WP(C
) 3114/2007 is also relevant to point out here which
reads as under:




       "17. This Court takes a serious note of the two-year delay in releasing
information, the lack of adequate reasoning in the orders of the Public
Information Officer and the Appellate Authority and the lack of application of
mind in relation to the nature of information sought. The materials on record
clearly show the lackadaisical approach of the second and third respondent in
releasing the information sought. However, the Petitioner has not been able to

                                         11

 demonstrate that they malafidely denied the information sought. Therefore, a
direction to the Central Information Commission to initiate action under 
Section 20

of the Act, cannot be issued."



Nonetheless, in keeping with spirit of the 
RTI Act
, the Respondent CPIOs are
advised to provide more cogent and point-wise reply to the RTI Applications in
future indicating unavailability of information, wherever applicable, so as to
avoid causing similar aspersions to be cast on their conduct in the future.



                   The appeal(s) are disposed of accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                        12