[Cites 
19
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Sanjeev Kumar vs Chief Commissioner Of Income Tax (Cca) , ... on 29 December, 2022


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/CCAPTA/A/2021/646702

Sanjeev Kumar                                           ......अपीलकता /Appellant


                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम
CPIO,
O/o the Income Tax Officer,
Ward -4(1), Patna, Room No. 49,
4th Floor, Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Bhawan,
Dak Bunglow Chowraha, Patna - 800001,
Bihar.                                               .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                     :   13/10/2022
Date of Decision                    :   27/12/2022

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :              Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on            :   01/03/2021
CPIO replied on                     :   05/04/2021
First appeal filed on               :   28/06/2021
First Appellate Authority's order   :   27/07/2021
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated          :   04/10/2021

Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 01.03.2021 seeking the following
information and the CPIO replied on 05.04.2021 as under:



                                          1


 Sl.   Details of information called for by the applicant Required Information
No
1     Kindly provide the Name, Designation, official
      address & details (Range, Ward etc), Contact no,
      email id of the investigating/ Assessing officer
      handling above mentioned TEP.

2     Kindly provide me the preliminary investigation
      reports pursuant to which notices under Sections
      133(6) of the Income Tax have been issued to
      the asseessee on 03rd April, 2019.

3     Kindly provide the reply of the assessee against
      the notices issued
 u/s 133(6)
 of the I.T. Act, 1961
      on 03rd April, 2019.

4     Please provide the Gross amount and Net                Information sought vide
      Taxable amount filled by assessee in their             this application pertains
      respective ITR for the A.Y. 2012-13 & A.Y. 2013-       to third party information

      14.                                                    and hence, in view of
5     Please provide the findings of spot enquiry done       provisions of 
RTI Act
,
      in the case of Sri Chitranjan Kumar Sinha by the       2005 it cannot be
      ITI of your office as stated by your office in reply   provided.
      of RTI no CCAPT/R/E/20/00177/1.

6     Please provide the information whether
      reopening of the case of Sri Chitranjan Kumar
      Sinha for the A.Y.2013-14 has been done based
      on spot enquiry done by your office as
      mentioned in your reply of RTI no
      CCAPT/R/E/20/00177/1.

7     Please provide the reason If reopening of the
      case of Sri Chitranjan Kumar Sinha for the
      A.Y.2013-14 has not been done yet.

8     Kindly provide the current status of subjected
      TEP and tentative time frame for the final
      resolution of the above mentioned TEP.

9     Please provide the procedure and time frame for
      resolution of such TEP as mentioned in the
      standard operation procedure (SOP). Please
      provide soft copy of relevant pages of SOP
      having information regarding procedure and
      time frame to handle/deal such TEP.

                                           2


 10   Please provide the information whether
     subjected TEP (UIN: 18061354C) is being
     considered as per SOP. If so, please provide the
     reason and responsible authority for causing
     such huge delay in the subjected TEP
     (UIN:18061354C).

11   Fate of my complaint (tax evasion petition)
     dated 13.06.2018.



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 28.06.2021. FAA's order
dated 27.07.2021, upheld the reply of the CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present through audio conference.
Respondent: Virendra Kumar, CPIO present through audio conference.



The Appellant narrated the factual background of the information sought for in
the RTI Application as stated in the grounds of the Second Appeal:



       "I got married in November 2012 to Smt.Sweta Sinha. In August 2016 she
has framed a false criminal case u/s 498a / 
34
 Ipc & 3/4 dowry act , against me
and my family. In December 2016 she filed a domestic violence complaint under

Section 12
,
18
,
19
,
20
,
22
,
23
 of PWDVA Act 2005: alleging that she had spent/paid
as streedhan an amount of Rs. Fifty lakhs..



      I am completely dependent on information I have requested in the RTI to
defend me and my family but It is disappointing when I get no information on
genuine query to prove my innocence from various false cases.



       Point no 4.1 to 4.11 still remains unanswered even after the consideration
of my TEP in 'C' category 3 years ago. It is further submitted that registering of
false cases under section 498a and 
Dowry Act
 makes this case of RTI information
demand a matter of higher public interest, same as observed by following quote in
the various CIC and Hon'ble High Court Judgment.

                                         3


       As I am the informer who has launched the TEP (Tax Evasion Petition) and
being the appellant for the TEP I have all the rights to know the process of the
complaint if handled properly or not, as there is a full chance that the Information
provided by the culprit tax evaders will be forged and falsed and hence the right to
know if the tax evader has lied."



The CPIO submitted that the assessee against whom the averred TEP has been
filed was issued with a notice under 
Section 148
 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 on
30.06.2021.



Decision:



The Commission based on a perusal of the facts on record observes that the
denial of the information sought for in the RTI Application by the CPIO being
related to a third party is appropriate in principle, however, the CPIO erred in not
having specified the exemption clause of 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act, which was
eventually invoked by the FAA. For the sake of clarity, the said exemption of

Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act is reproduced as under:



      "Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there shall be no
obligation to give any citizen:



       (j) information which relates to personal information the disclosure of which
has no relationship to any public activity or interest, or which would cause
unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual unless the Central Public
Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer or the appellate
authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that the larger public interest justifies
the disclosure of such information:.."



In this regard, the attention of the Appellant is drawn towards a judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of Central Public Information Officer,
Supreme Court of 
India Vs. Subhash Chandra Agarwal
 in Civil Appeal No. 10044
of 2010 with Civil Appeal No. 10045 of 2010 and Civil Appeal No. 2683 of 2010
wherein the import of "personal information" envisaged under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of
RTI Act has been exemplified in the context of earlier ratios 
laid down by
 the
same Court in the matter(
s) of Canara Bank Vs. C.S. Shyam
 in Civil Appeal No.22
of 2009; 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande vs. Central Information Commissioner &



                                         4

 Ors.
, (2013) 1 SCC 212 and R.K. Jain vs. Union of India & Anr., (2013) 14 SCC 794.
The following was thus held:




       "59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion, would
indicate that personal records, including name, address, physical, mental and
psychological status, marks obtained, grades and answer sheets, are all treated as
personal information. Similarly, professional records, including qualification,
performance, evaluation reports, ACRs, disciplinary proceedings, etc. are all
personal information. Medical records, treatment, choice of medicine, list of
hospitals and doctors visited, findings recorded, including that of the family
members, information relating to assets, liabilities, income tax returns, details of
investments, lending and borrowing, etc. are personal information. Such personal
information is entitled to protection from unwarranted invasion of privacy and
conditional access is available when stipulation of larger public interest is
satisfied. This list is indicative and not exhaustive..."



Further, on the aspect of larger public interest, the Commission places reliance on
a catena of judgments of the superior Courts on the import of "public interest" as
under:



The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
Bihar Public Service Commission vs.
Saiyed Hussain Abbas Rizwi & Anr. [CIVIL APPEAL NO.9052 OF
 2012] observed as
under:




 
"23. The expression 'public interest' has to be understood in its true
connotation so as to give complete meaning to the relevant provisions of the Act.
The expression 'public interest' must be viewed in its strict sense with all its
exceptions so as to justify denial of a statutory exemption in terms of the Act. In its
common parlance, the expression 'public interest', like 'public purpose', is not
capable of any precise definition. It does not have a rigid meaning, is elastic and
takes its colour from the statute in which it occurs, the concept varying with time
and state of society and its needs. [
State of Bihar v. Kameshwar Singh
 (AIR 1952
SC 252)]. It also means the general welfare of the public that warrants
recommendation and protection; something in which the public as a whole has a
stake [Black's Law Dictionary (Eighth Edition)]. Emphasis Supplied
       "24. The satisfaction has to be arrived at by the authorities objectively and
the consequences of such disclosure have to be weighed with regard to
circumstances of a given case. The decision has to be based on objective
satisfaction recorded for ensuring that larger public interest outweighs

                                          5

 unwarranted invasion of privacy or other factors stated in the provision. Certain
matters, particularly in relation to appointment, are required to be dealt with
great confidentiality."


 
".... Similarly, there may be cases where the disclosure has no relationship
to any public activity or interest or it may even cause unwarranted invasion of
privacy of the individual. All these protections have to be given their due
implementation as they spring from statutory exemptions. It is not a decision
simpliciter between private interest and public interest. It is a matter where a
constitutional protection is available to a person with regard to the right to
privacy. Thus, the public interest has to be construed while keeping in mind the
balance factor between right to privacy and right to information with the
purpose sought to be achieved and the purpose that would be served in the
larger public interest, particularly when both these rights emerge from the
constitutional values under the Constitution of India." Emphasis Supplied
Similarly, in another judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of 
S. P.
Gupta v President of India
, [AIR 1982 SC 149], with reference to 'public interest' it
has been maintained that:




 
"Redressing public injury, enforcing public duty, protecting social, collective,
'diffused' rights and interests vindicate public interest... [in the enforcement of
which] the public or a class of the community have pecuniary interest or some
interest by which their legal rights or liabilities are affected." Emphasis Supplied

And, in the matter of 
State of Gujarat vs. Mirzapur Moti Kureshi Kasab Jamat &
others
 [Appeal (Civil) 4937-4940 of 1998], the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held
that:




      "the interest of general public (public interest) is of a wide importance
covering public order, public health, public security, morals, economic welfare of
the community, and the objects mentioned in Part IV of the Constitution [i.e.
Directive Principles of State Policy]". Emphasis Supplied

Since there is no material on record to ascribe larger public interest in the
disclosure of the information related to the averred third party in any of the
above referred contexts, rather it relates to a matrimonial dispute entailing
personal interest, the Commission finds no reason to depart from the view taken
by the FAA.



                                          6


 Nonetheless, as a matter of limited relief, points 8 & 11 of the RTI Application
warrant relief in terms of the current status and/or outcome of the TEP that
ought to be provided to the Appellant. The CPIO is hereby directed to inform in
writing the current status and/or outcome of the averred TEP to the Appellant
within 15 days from the date of receipt of this order under due intimation to the
Commission.



                     The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                  Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                         हािन)
                                        Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                        7