[Cites 
6
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


R Peter John vs Prime Minister'S Office on 10 April, 2020


                                        केन्द्रीय सूचना आयोग
                              Central Information Commission
                                    बाबा गंगनाथ मागग, मुननरका
                               Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                                 नई दिल्ली, New Delhi - 110067

द्वितीय अपील संख्या / Second Appeal No.:- CIC/PMOIN/A/2018/141809-BJ

Mr. R. Peter John (Adv.)

                                                                         ....अपीलकताग/Appellant
                                            VERSUS
                                              बनाम
CPIO & Under Secretary
Prime Minister's Office (PMO), South Block
New Delhi - 110011

                                                                      ...प्रनतिािीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing       :                      24.03.2020
Date of Decision      :                      10.04.2020

Date of RTI application                                                     12.03.2018
CPIO's response                                                             23.03.2018
Date of the First Appeal                                                    31.03.2018
First Appellate Authority's response                                        27.04.2018
Date of diarised receipt of Appeal by the Commission                        04.07.2018

                                           ORDER

FACTS:

The Appellant vide his RTI application sought information on 06 points regarding the number of
letters received from the Government of Tamil Nadu in respect of Kauvery issues, till the date of
filing of the RTI application; the number of reply letters sent to the Government of Tamil Nadu;
certified copies of letters sent to the O/o the PM of India by the CM of Tamil Nadu, till the date
of filing of the RTI application and other issues related thereto.



The CPIO, vide its letter dated 23.03.2018, stated that the information sought is wide and
pertained to various Sections/Wings, compilation of required information would
disproportionately divert the public resources and attract provisions of 
Section 7(9)
 of the RTI
Act, 2005. Dissatisfied with the CPIO's response, the Appellant approached the FAA. The FAA,
vide its order dated 27.04.2018, upheld the CPIO's response.



HEARING:

Facts emerging during the hearing:

The following were present:

                                                                                       Page 1 of 3


 Appellant: Mr. R. Peter John (Adv.) through TC;

Respondent: Mr. Praveen Kumar (US) and CPIO through TC;



In view of the Corona Virus Pandemic in the Country, both the parties were heard on phone. The
Appellant consistently maintained that a reply was not received by him. In its reply, the
Respondent explained that the issue may have been dealt with from time to time in several files
spread over different years and therefore, it was not feasible to locate the information at one
place. He specifically raised the provision of 
Section 7(9)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, where
compilation of such information could disproportionately divert the public resources. During the
hearing, the Respondent was narrated various dimensions of the Kauvery issues raised by several
CMs and it was suggested that the Appellant could focus on the specific period to enable them to
identify and locate the details sought by him. The Appellant appreciated the concerns expressed
by the Respondent and agreed to re-address his application accordingly.



The Commission referred to the definition of information
 u/s 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 which is
reproduced below:

       "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-
       mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, report,
       papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and information
       relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other
       law for the time being in force."

Furthermore, a reference can also be made to the relevant extract of 
Section 2 (j)
 of the RTI Act,
2005 which reads as under:

       "(j) right to information" means the right to information accessible under this Act which
       is held by or under the control of any public authority and includes ........"

In this context a reference was made to the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in 2011 (8) SCC
497 (
CBSE and Anr. Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay and Ors
), wherein it was held as under:


       35..... "It is also not required to provide 'advice' or 'opinion' to an applicant, nor
       required to obtain and furnish any 'opinion' or 'advice' to an applicant. The reference to
       'opinion' or 'advice' in the definition of 'information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only
       refers to such material available in the records of the public authority. Many public
       authorities have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and opinion to
       the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused with any obligation
       under the 
RTI Act
."

Furthermore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Khanapuram Gandaiah Vs. Administrative
Officer and Ors. Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.34868 OF 2009 (Decided on January 4, 2010)
had held as under:

       6. "....
Under the RTI Act
 "information" is defined under 
Section 2(f)
 which provides:

       "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-
       mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, report,
       papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and information
       relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other
       law for the time being in force."

                                                                                       Page 2 of 3


        This definition shows that an applicant under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act can get any
       information which is already in existence and accessible to the public authority under
       law. Of course, under the 
RTI Act
 an applicant is entitled to get copy of the opinions,
       advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he cannot ask for any information as to why such
       opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc. have been passed."

       7. "....the Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material which is not
       before him; or any information he could have obtained under law. Under 
Section 6
 of
       the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such information which can be accessed
       by the "public authority" under any other law for the time being in force. The answers
       sought by the petitioner in the application could not have been with the public authority
       nor could he have had access to this information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged
       to give any reasons as to why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was
       before him."



DECISION:



Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by both the parties, no further
intervention of the Commission is required in the matter.



The Appeal stands disposed accordingly.



                                                              (Bimal Julka) (बबमल जुल्का)
                                     (Chief Information Commissioner) (मुख्य सूचना आयुक्त)
Authenticated true copy
(अभिप्रमाणणत सत्यावपत प्रनत)




(K.L. Das) (के.एल.िास)
(Dy. Registrar) (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26186535/ 
[email protected]

दिनांक / Date: 10.04.2020





                                                                                     Page 3 of 3