[Cites 
30
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Samir Sardana vs Mormugao Port Trust on 24 May, 2021


                                                    CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

                                के   य सूचना आयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                            बाबागंगनाथ माग,मु नरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ल , New Delhi - 110067

  वतीय अपील सं या/ Second Appeal No. CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

In the matter of:

Samir Sardana                                             ... अपीलकता/Appellant
                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम
CPIO,                                                   ... तवाद गण /Respondent
(Vigilance), Mormugao Port Trust,
Administrative Office,
Headland, Sada, Goa.

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:
RTI : 23.08.2018              FA     : 12.10.2018        SA     : 20.12.2018
CPIO Reply: 18.09.2018
                              FAO : 05.11.2018           Hearing : 02.03.2021
and 28.09.2019

The following were present:

Appellant: Shri Samir Sardana participated in the hearing upon being contacted on
his telephone.

Respondent: Shri Piedade Eutiquio Rodrigues, Asst. Executive Engineer, CME
Department participated in the hearing through video conferencing from NIC
South Goa.




                                                                        Page 1 of 31
                                                  CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

                                 ORDER



Information sought:

The Appellant filed an RTI Application dated 23.08.2018 seeking information as
under:



                                                                     Page 2 of 31


 CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409





                Page 3 of 31

 CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409





                Page 4 of 31

 CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409





                Page 5 of 31

 CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409





                Page 6 of 31

                                                     CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409




The CPIO vide letter dated 28.09.2018, provided adequate explanation in response
to the appellant query. Being dissatisfied, the Appellant filed a First Appeal dated
12.10.2018. The First Appellate Authority vide order dated 05.11.2018, informed
as under:



                                                                          Page 7 of 31


 CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409





                Page 8 of 31

 CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409





                Page 9 of 31

                                                      CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

Grounds for Second Appeal:

The Appellant filed a Second Appeal u/s 19 of the Act on the ground of
unsatisfactory reply furnished by the Respondent. He requested the Commission to
direct the CPIO to provide complete information sought for and take appropriate
legal action against the Respondent. He also requested the bench to grant an award
of compensation.



Submissions made by Appellant and Respondent during Hearing:
The Appellant stated that he is not satisfied with the information provided by the
Respondent public authority. He further stated that an official of the Respondent
public authority has been chargesheeted and the said information has been denied
as third party information. Upon queried by the Commission as to what is his
interest in seeking this information, he explained that the information sought is in
the public interest as several crores of rupees has been involved. He further
explained that being a Chartered Accountant only he knows the importance
disclosing such documents in public interest. He furthermore explained that he
only wants the input of the chargesheet and not the copy. In addition, he tried to
tutor the Commission regarding the difference between the chargesheet of CBI and
the chargesheet of Port Trust.



The Respondent submitted that appropriate and permissible information has been
provided to the Appellant on 28.09.2018. He further submitted that the First
Appellate Authority vide letter dated 05.11.2018 has invoked 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of the
RTI Act because the Complaint Register contains the name of the concerned
Complainants whose identity is kept secret and the disclosure of the same may
endanger the life or physical safety of the concerned person.



                                                                          Page 10 of 31


                                                        CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

The Appellant interjected to state that the name of the concerned chargesheeted
employee is no more a secret because the same is already aired in the media. Upon
queried by the Commission to substantiate the same, he replied that one of the MD
of Respondent public authority, who is also one of the senior personnel has been
chargesheeted. He further requested the Commission to disclose the name of the
concerned official as the same would be a benchmark in future cases.



A written submission has been received by the Commission from the Appellant
vide letter dated 11.11.2020, wherein he has demanded for photographing of
records. He has claimed that the order of the First Appellate Authority is illegal
and his authority was termed as incompetent.



A written submission has been received by the Commission from Shri Anant V.P.
Chodnekar, CPIO/Financial Advisor & Chief Accounts Officer vide letter dated
17.11.2020 wherein he has stated as under:



      "1. Mormugao Port Trust is a body Corporate under the 
Major Port Trusts
      Act, 1963
 and provides various services to the Port Users and the Nation for
      facilitating import-export trade and commerce in accordance with the provisions
      of the Act. There are seven separate departments in the Mormugao Port Trust,
      each having independent and distinct activity to perform under their control and
      the activities of the finance department are looked after by the Financial Advisor
      and Chief Accounts Officer (FA&CAO). Undersigned has taken the charge of the
      Finance Department with effect from 08-11-2019 consequent to the transfer of my
      predecessor Shri Vinayak Rao B.S. to the New Managalore Port Trust as per the
      order of the Central Government.

      2.     The above named Appellant has filed around 08 different Appeals under
      
Section 19
 of the RTI Act, 2005 (Diary No. CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637355, 637402,
      637389, 637410, 637391, 637412, 637392 & 637409) and further another 04
      Complaints under 
Section 18
 of the Act (CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637414, 637415,
      637419 & 637479) and the contents of all the said appeals as well as all the
      complaints appears to be same and completely mixed up and written in a most
      vague form, completely difficult for any CPIO or any independent department to
      severe and to respond in respect to the matter relating to its functioning.



                                                                             Page 11 of 31


                                                  CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409


3.     From the records of the Finance Department, it is observes that, the
present Appellant/Complainant had submitted 4 applications under 
section 2(f)
,

2(j)
 and 
6(1)
 of the RTI Act for seeking information to the Office of Finance
Department on 23.08.2018 when my predecessor, Shri Vinayaka Rao B.S. was the
HoD & CPIO for the Finance Department. The issues/queries raised in each of
the application were many in numbers and largely concerning the functioning of
various other departments whereas the subject covering Finance Department was
to the minimum extent found only in his Application No.1 and No.2 (partly).

4.     Accordingly, the then FA&CAO & CPIO for Finance Department vide his
covering letter No. FD/Est-1(45)2018/590 dated 28.08.2018 forwarded the copy of
the Appellant's/Complainant's Application No.1, 2 & 4 to the CPIO for the Traffic
Department to examine and furnish the information concerning his department
directly to the information seeker. Copy of the Application No.1 & 3 was sent to
the CPIO for Mechanical Engineering Department with similar request. And a
copy of the Application No.2 transferred to the CPIO for Marine Department to
respond to the extent pertaining to their department directly and another copy of
the Application No.2 & 4 was sent to the CPIO for the General Administration
Department for enabling them to submit the information directly to the
information seeker. While transferring the copies of the Applications by the then
erstwhile CPIO for the Finance Department in his transfer communication as
stated above has clearly mentioned that, the information pertaining to their
respective departments to be furnished directly to the information seeker as such
the transfer was made impliedly under 
Section 6(3)
 of the Act.

5.      As said in the commencement part of the present submission that, some
limited part queries of Application No.1 and No.2 were concerning Finance
Department and to the large extent the remaining queries/matter was substantially
relating to the functioning of the other department. The then CPIO for the Finance
Department vide communication No. FA/B-13/2018/195 dated 18.09.2018
furnished the relevant information covered by the Appellants Application No.2 to
the fullest extent and a copy of the same here annexed as ANNEXURE-I.

6.     Whereas the then CPIO for the Finance Department vide his
communication No. FA/B-13/2018/194 dated 18.09.2018 agreed to furnish the
relevant information covered by item No. 4.1 in the Application No.2 and
requested the present Appellant/Complainant to make arrangement for depositing
the costs of Rs. 230/- for supply of 115 pages the information sought by him. A
copy of the said communication dated 18.09.2018 here annexed as ANNEXURE-
II.

7.     In the above said communication dated 18.09.2018 - ANNEXURE-II, a
respectful statement was also made by the then CPIO for the Finance Department




                                                                       Page 12 of 31

                                                   CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

stating that, the information seeker to kindly provide a copy of document
confirming his citizenship which the Appellant was impliedly required to submit
only at the time payment of the costs/collection of the public information. The then
CPIO for the Finance Department has made the statement most respectfully after
possibly viewing the media news that the Mr. Samir Sardana, a son of retired
Major General arrested in Goa for suspected terror links. Hon'ble Chief Minister
of Goa also tabled papers in the Legislative Assembly. He was arrested by the ATS
Police at Vasco Railway Station for suspicious movements and had seized 4
mobile phones, six passports, 23 SIM Cards and laptop whereas ATS had
managed to obtain some 35 e-mail ID's and also discovered internet-downloaded
data about previous bomb blast in the country and information about bomb-
making. Copies of the news item 05 in nos. of annexed as ANNEXURE-III.

8.     In such circumstances as explained above, without casting any stigma, the
then CPIO for the Finance Department has respectfully agreed to part away the
information to the information seeker after his providing the costs by showing his
citizenship identity and the said statement was made in absolute good faith.

9.     And whereas the Appellant failed to deposit the costs and to collect the
information sought and on the contrary through email dated 17.10.2018 lodged an
Appeal before the First Appellate Authority, Shri Guruprasad Rai, Deputy
Chairman & FAA against the communication No. FA/B-13/2018/194 dated
18.09.2018 mixing issues concerning other CPIO's and Departments.
Subsequently, the Appellant made another 8 different appeals before the FAA by
consolidating the matter of all the CPIO's and to pursued the same by sending
communication by email dated 20.10.2018, 28.10.2018 and 01.11.2018, copes of
the same here annexed as ANNEXURE-IV collectively.

10.     And whereas the First Appellate Authority pleased to consider the various
joint and mixed appeals made by the present Appellant/Complainant and disposed
of the same vide his Common Order/Communication No. GAD/LB(46-
RTI)/2018/2500 dated 05.11.2018 and a copy of the same here annexed as
ANNEXURE-V.

11.    This CPIO for Finance Department of the Mormugao Port Trust makes his
submission out of abundant caution in all the matters that is, 12 nos appeals under

section 19
 of the RTI Act and 4 nos complaints under 
section 18
 of the Act even
though the issues raised in all the above applications directly does not pertains to
this CPIO to avoid a situation or any such allegations from the
appellant/complainant at a later stage that this CPIO did not furnish his
submission or reply in any of those matters. Therefore, the present submission of
this respondent kindly be taken on record along with the submission made by
other respective CPIOs of the other departments in the respective matters.



                                                                         Page 13 of 31


                                                         CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409


      12.     In the light of the submissions made above, it is abundantly clear that, the
      then CPIO for the Finance Department has done his lawful duty to segregate his
      part of the information relevant to his department and to furnish to the
      Appellant/Complainant even through the same was jumbled by the information
      seeker in the most vague way together with the information pertaining to several
      other CPIO's/Departments. Further, the First Appellate Authority was considerate
      enough to entertain such a jumbled up appeals and issued his order dated
      05.11.2018 as stated above disposing off his all the first appeals together jointly.
      Therefore, the prayers made by the present Appellant/Complainant for imposing
      punishment under 
section 20(1)
 and 
20(2)
 of the RTI Act on the concerned CPIO's
      is completely unjust and improper. Further, the prayer made by the
      Appellant/Complainant for issuing Censures on the First Appellate Authority is
      totally uncalled, unjustified and in the circumstances deserves to be condemned
      and rejected with warning to the Appellant/Complainant.

      13.      Therefore, it is prayed that:

            a) By an order of the Hon'ble Commission both the Appeals and Complaints
               preferred against the CPIO for the Finance Department be dismissed with
               costs;

            b) By an order the Hon'ble Commission may reject all the reliefs claimed by
               the Appellant/Complainant as not sustainable in law; and

            c) Any other order the Hon'ble Commission may deem to be fit in the
               circumstances of the present case.

Decision:

Upon perusal of the facts on record as well as on the basis of the proceedings
during the hearing, the Commission observes that the Appellant in his written
submissions dated 11.11.2021 has adopted a convoluted method to express the
facts of the instant case. In fact, the information sought by the Appellant in the
instant RTI Application also runs around 6 pages. In addition, the Appellant has
quoted several orders of the Commission, judgments of the Hon'ble High Court of
Delhi as well as a reference has also been made to the orders of National Green
Tribunal, in order to support his claim for information. The Commission is of the
view that as much as the CPIO has a statutory responsibility to comply with the




                                                                               Page 14 of 31

                                                          CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

provisions of the 
RTI Act
, the Applicants filing a request under 
RTI Act
 should
also keep in mind that they should not transgress the letter and spirit of the 
RTI Act

by flooding RTI Applications, which are cumbersome, protracted and
circumlocutory in nature. The Commission severely admonishes the Appellant for
going beyond the stipulated word limit, which has troubled the Respondent to
ascertain what information has been sought and pertains to which Department. In
this regard, the Bench refers to Rule 3 of the RTI Rules, 2012, which says:

      3. Application Fee.- An application under sub-section (1) of 
section 6
 of the Act
      shall be accompanied by a fee of rupees ten and shall ordinarily not contain more
      than five hundred words, excluding annexures, containing address of the Central
      Public Information Officer and that of the applicant:

      Provided that no application shall be rejected only on the ground that it contains
      more than five hundred words.



The Commission, therefore, opines that the Appellant instead of seeking
information in a reasonable and comprehensible way; has resorted to adopt a
tortuous   method     containing     quite    a    lot    of   issues/queries    in     a
disorganized/indecipherable manner, resulting in unfathomable hurdles on the part
of the Respondent. The Appellant being a responsible citizen who poses to be
concerned about the functionality of the Respondent public authority must
impliedly know his limitations while filing an RTI query before any Respondent
public authority. The Commission strictly cautions him that in future, he shall
holistically adhere to the relevant provisions of the RTI Rules, 2012 while filing
any RTI Application before any public authority.



Further, the Commission finds it pivotal to aver at this juncture, that the Appellant
in the instant RTI Application and the Second Appeal followed by his lengthy
written submissions and annexures alongwith it has time and again avowed that the
information sought is not just in public interest but in national interest (without




                                                                             Page 15 of 31

                                                       CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

substantiating/justifying the same). It is pertinent to state herein that the
Appellant's contention is rather preposterous because mere statements such as
'involving larger public interest' and 'national interest' do not suffice and the onus
to prove the same lies with the Appellant. In fact, the Appellant in his written
submission has vociferously argued that the Respondent has refused to provide the
relevant name of the official on whom corruption was proven. Now, it is clear from
the records that the First Appellate Authority vide order dated 05.11.2018 has
invoked 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of the RTI Act for not disclosing the name of the
concerned individual, whereas only the Appellant in his statement has averred that
the corruption has been proven. The Commission is of the opinion that anyone who
utters the word 'corruption' or alleges corruption does not become entitled to get
information. The onus of substantiating the allegation of corruption lies on the RTI
applicant and mere 'perception' is certainly not a ground to agitate for right to
information. Consequently, the Appellant during the proceedings of the hearing
has urged that one of the MD of Respondent has been chargesheeted and the said
news is aired on the media. Even after the Commission queried to substantiate the
same, he miserably failed to justify his averment. 
Hence, it is proven that the
Appellant has chosen to aver statements, which are frivolous and beyond the
sphere of truth. Such behavior of the Appellant is not just infuriating and the same
has caused criminal wastage of Commission's as well as Respondent public
authority's time that too at the cost of the public exchequer. The Commission
needs to think twice regarding the intent of the Appellant as to whether he
genuinely wants information from the Respondent or intends to harass the
Respondent public authority. The Appellant in the present RTI Application has
categorically relied upon a judgment of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the
matter of 
B.S. Mathur v. Public Information Officer of Delhi High
 Court vide




                                                                           Page 16 of 31

                                                        CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

W.P.(C) 295 and 608 of 2011, wherein he has referred that the Hon'ble Court has
held that "In any appeal proceedings, the onus to prove that a denial of a request
was justified shall be on the Central Public Information Officer...". The
Commission without denying the said fact draws the Appellant's attention that
majority of the queries (under the headings 'Vigilance'; 'Accounts, Audit and
AAR'; 'Audit Type'; 'Auditor and Scope'; and 'Audit Working Paper Files')
sought in the present RTI Application are in the nature of seeking PIO's
confirmation regarding certain aspects such as whether the Public Authority
maintains a Preliminary Enquiry Register; PIO to confirm that annual accounts are
prepared and audited after 2015-16; PIO to specifically confirm that if it has any
statutory audit carried out in the last 7 years?; PIO to confirm that the Internal and
Statutory Audits of the MPT in Goa, in the last 10 years, is done by AG Goa etc.
from the Respondent. The Commission points out that though it is not mandatory
to provide reasons for seeking information under the 
RTI Act
, but the same does
not mean that an applicant can seek all/any information under the sky. The
Commission will not be incorrect in saying that the Appellant has relatively
misinterpreted the term "information". It has been clearly defined at 
Section 2(f)

of the RTI Act as under:


      2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, -

             (f)"information" means any material in any form, including records,
             documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars,
             orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data
             material held in any electronic form and information relating to any private
             body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other law for
             the time being in force;



In view of the above, it is clearly evident that the information which is available in
record or accessible by a public authority can only be provided under the 
RTI Act
.
In the instant case, the Appellant has not only sought clarifications from the




                                                                              Page 17 of 31

                                                        CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

Respondent, instead, he has argued that photography is allowed under the 
RTI Act

under 
Section 2(j)(iv)
 of the RTI Act. It is pertinent to state herein that 
Section
2(j)(iv)
 of the RTI Act reads as under:

      2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, -

             (j)"right to information" means the right to information accessible under
             this Act which is held by or under the control of any public authority and
             includes the right to -

                    (iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes,
                    video cassettes or in any other electronic mode or through printouts
                    where such information is stored in a computer or in any other
                    device;



It seems the Appellant has yet again misinterpreted 
Section 2(j)(iv)
 of the RTI Act.
In his defense, he has relied upon a coordinate Bench's decision vide File No.
CIC/AD/A/09/00125 in the matter of Mr. Sidharth Mishra v/s. BSNL, Cuttack,
wherein the Commission in its decision dated 23.02.2009 had categorically
allowed the Appellant therein to use camera to take photos of the relevant
documents. Moreover, the Commission cannot overlook the aspect that the
adjudication is done on case-to-case basis as well as in accordance with the facts
and circumstance of the concerned case. However, in the instant case, the
Respondent public authority conducts its operations in multifarious aspects that
directly impact the economy of the nation, to an extent. Hence, considering the
importance of the services rendered by them to the country as well as considering
the information sought by the Appellant in the instant RTI Application,
photography of the averred documents/records/information cannot be allowed by
this Bench because the question of photography arises only if the condition of the
document/record is in a dilapidated state and cannot be photocopied anymore by
repeated handling. Nevertheless, the Respondent public authority vide their reply
dated 28.09.2018 had provided adequate and permissible information pertaining to
the Vigilance aspect. Subsequently, in the written submission of the Respondent, it



                                                                              Page 18 of 31

                                                      CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

has been holistically clarified that on 18.09.2018, the Appellant was asked to remit
a sum of Rs. 230/- to furnish 115 pages of documents/records pertaining to
Accounts department. The Commission is convinced that there is no record of
Appellant having remitted the said amount with the Respondent public authority
till date and this conduct of the Appellant of not making the averred payment and
alleging that incorrect, illegal information has been provided by the Respondent
brings to a conclusion that he is no more in need of information, instead, he
particularly wants to harass the Respondent public authority for the reasons best
known to him. This erratic attempt of the Appellant is severely criticized and
admonished by the Commission. Moreover, the Appellant in a cyclostyled manner
has framed the queries of the instant RTI Application, wherein he has specifically
asked the PIO to 'CONFIRM' the annual accounts are prepared and audited after
2015-16; 'CONFIRM' if it has a copy of the Audit Working Paper Files and
schedules of the Audit by the AS-Goa or the CAG, w.r.t. the Audits done by the
AG-Goa/CAG, in the last 7 years etc., which is beyond the purview of 
Section 2(f)

of the RTI Act.



In this regard, the Commission finds it RELEVANT and JUST to rely upon the
following judgments:



 
a. The fact that the onus to establish mala fide or unreasonable conduct of the
      CPIO is on the Appellant/Complainant is no longer res integra. The Hon'ble
      Delhi High Court in W.P.(C) 11271/2009 in the matter of 
Registrar of
      Companies & Ors. v. Dharmendra Kumar Garg & Anr.
 (delivered on
      01.06.2012) held as under:


            "61. Even if it were to be assumed for the sake of argument, that the view
            taken by the learned Central Information Commissioner in the impugned
            order was correct, and that the PIOs were obliged to provide the
            information, which was otherwise retrievable by the querist by resort to



                                                                           Page 19 of 31

                                                         CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

             
Section 610
 of the Companies Act, it could not be said that the information
             had been withheld malafide or deliberately without any reasonable cause.
             It can happen that the PIO may genuinely and bonafidely entertain the
             belief and hold the view that the information sought by the querist cannot
             be provided for one or the other reasons. Merely because the CIC
             eventually finds that the view taken by the PIO was not correct, it cannot
             automatically lead to issuance of a showcause notice under 
Section 20
 of
             the RTI Act and the imposition of penalty. The legislature has cautiously
             provided that only in cases of malafides or unreasonable conduct i.e.,
             where the PIO, without reasonable cause refuses to receive the application,
             or provide the information, or knowingly gives incorrect, incomplete or
             misleading information or destroys the information, that the personal
             penalty on the PIO can be imposed. This was certainly not one such case. If
             the CIC starts imposing penalty on the PIOs in every other case, without
             any justification, it would instill a sense of constant apprehension in those
             functioning as PIOs in the public authorities, and would put undue pressure
             on them. They would not be able to fulfill their statutory duties under the
             
RTI Act
 with an independent mind and with objectivity. Such consequences
             would not auger will for the future development and growth of the regime
             that the 
RTI Act
 seeks to bring in, and may lead to skewed and imbalanced
             decisions by the PIOs Appellate Authorities and the CIC. It may even lead
             to unreasonable and absurd orders and bring the institutions created by the
             
RTI Act
 in disrepute.



It is important to mention herein that the Appellant in the instant Second Appeal
has prayed as under:

    Penalty on the PIO (under 
Section 19(8)(c)
, of the RTI Act, 2005);
    Dismissal of the PIO on account of illegal, deliberate, malafide and baseless
     rejection of RTI Applications (and violation of CCS Rules, as stated in Para
     2.4.2);

    Administrative action and/strictures, against the PIO (under 
Section 20(2)
, of the
     RTI Act, 2005);

    Recommendation to the GOI - Ministry of Shipping for administrative action
     and/strictures, against the PIO/FAA
    Impose Maximum Penalty, on the PIO under 
Section 20(1)
, of the RTI Act,2005:
    Direct the Respondent to refund the Application fee paid by Complainant while
     submitting RTI Application, as per section (7)(6) of the 
RTI Act
;
    Provide the information free of cost, as per section (7)(6) of the 
RTI Act
;
    Invoke its powers under the 
RTI Act
 to issue any other direction or
     recommendation as it may deem appropriate;



                                                                               Page 20 of 31


                                                        CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

    Direct the public authority to make entry in Service Book/Annual Performance
     Appraisal Report of the Respondent for defying the provisions of the Act
    Compensation for the Appellant for pecuniary and other loss
                                                              [Reproduced verbatim]

It is evident from the above that the Appellant in the instant Second Appeal as well
as in the written submission has alleged the CPIO and ridiculed the Respondent
public authority in such a way, the Commission is left with no other alternative to
infer that the Appellant is not seeking the information from the Respondent in
public/national interest; instead, it appears that he is on a mission to seek
vengeance or has some personal vendetta against the Respondent public authority.



 
b. Similarly, the following observation of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in
      
Bhagat Singh v. CIC & Ors., W.P.(C
) 3114/2007, is also pertinent, wherein
      the Hon'ble Court stated as under:


             "17. This Court takes a serious note of the two year delay in releasing
             information, the lack of adequate reasoning in the orders of the Public
             Information Officer and the Appellate Authority and the lack of application
             of mind in relation to the nature of information sought. The materials on
             record clearly show the lackadaisical approach of the second and third
             respondent in releasing the information sought. However, the Petitioner
             has not been able to demonstrate that they malafidely denied the
             information sought. Therefore, a direction to the Central Information
             Commission to initiate action under 
Section 20
 of the Act, cannot be
             issued."



Further, the Commission is baffled to note that the Appellant has made such
unscrupulous remarks on the Respondent public authority; despite they have
provided appropriate and permissible information to the Appellant. In fact, it
appears that the Appellant has understood that the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 can be
twisted according to his whims and fancies as well as to his requirements. If that is
the case, the Commission is not an authority to educate an already educated




                                                                             Page 21 of 31

                                                        CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

individual. The Commission also notes that even during the hearing, the Appellant
rather makes an attempt to mystify both the Commission as well as the Respondent
by taking refuge on unconnected events or mentioning certain things without any
proof. The Commission is self-assured that the Appellant during the hearing is
always beating around the bush instead of specifying as to what information he has
sought or what information he wishes to seek. The modus operandi adopted by the
Appellant is nothing but a classic example of systematic persecution as well as
wasting precious time of the public authority as well as the Commission at the cost
of the public exchequer.



 
c. Further, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of Col. 
Rajendra
      Singh v. Central Information Commission and Anr., W.P.(C
) 5469 of 2008
      dated 20.03.2009, stated as under:


             "
Section 20
, no doubt empowers the CIC to take penal action and direct
             payment of such compensation or penalty as is warranted. Yet the
             Commission has to be satisfied that the delay occurred was without
             reasonable cause or the request was denied malafidely.
             ...

             The preceding discussion shows that at least in the opinion of this Court,
             there are no allegations to establish that the information was withheld
             malafide or unduly delayed so as to lead to an inference that petitioner was
             responsible for unreasonably withholding it."



Upon going through the reply dated 28.09.2018, wherein the Respondent has
provided appropriate and permissible information and to the Appellant and the
reply dated 18.09.2018, the Respondent had categorically requested the Appellant
to make a payment of Rs. 230/-, which has not been remitted till date. The
Commission finds that the Appellant was given ample opportunity to obtain the
relevant information as sought under the Accounts heading of the instant RTI
Application, which the Appellant has not replied to till date but is contesting on the




                                                                              Page 22 of 31

                                                         CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

issue that incorrect and illegal information has been provided by the Respondent,
which is bizarre.



 
d. Furthermore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of 
Advocate
      General, Bihar vs. M.P. Khair Industries
, [AIR 1980 SC 1946] has stated
      as under:


             "... filing of frivolous and vexatious petitions as abuse of the RTI process.
             Some of such abuses specifically mentioned by the Apex Court include
             initiating or carrying on proceedings which are wanting in bona-fides or
             which are frivolous, vexatious or oppressive. The Apex Court also observed
             that in such cases the Court has extensive alternative powers to prevent an
             abuse of its process by striking out or staying proceedings or by prohibiting
             taking up further proceedings..."



Subsequently, the Commission is rather perplexed to note that the Appellant, who
researches comprehensively, has relatively not appreciated the fact that a
PIO/CPIO is not supposed to provide clarification, not supposed to answers to
questions/queries etc. In the instant case, the Appellant has referred to a decision of
the National Green Tribunal, which had questioned the actions of the Respondent
regarding granting Environmental Clearance. The Appellant has not apprised the
Commission regarding how the said reliance on the National Green Tribunal's
decision/order causes an impact in deciding the instant matter. In addition, the
Appellant has placed reliance on European Convention of Human Rights,
American Convention of Human Rights, International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, without even ascertaining the fact as to whether India has ratified them or
not. It seems that the Appellant has failed to comprehend the fact that whenever
there is a conflict between two statutes, the lex loci is the shorthand version of the
choice of law rules that determine the lex causae. Even so, he has not even





                                                                               Page 23 of 31

                                                         CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

substantiated as to how the Articles of the aforesaid instruments/multi-national
treaty is applicable in the instant case.



 
e. It is pertinent to mention herein that the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has
      discussed the issue in great detail in the matter of 
Ashok Kumar Pandey v.
      The State of West Bengal
 [AIR 2003 SC 280, para 11], wherein J.Pasayat
      has held as under:


             "... It is depressing to note that on account of such trumpery proceedings
             initiated before the Courts, innumerable days are wasted, which time
             otherwise could have been spent for the disposal of cases of the genuine
             litigants. Though we spare no efforts in fostering and developing the
             laudable concept of PIL and extending our long arm of sympathy to the
             poor, the ignorant, the oppresses and the needy whose fundamental rights
             are infringed and violated and whose grievances go unnoticed,
             unrepresented and unheard; yet we cannot avoid but expressing our
             opinion that while genuine litigants with legitimate grievances relating to
             civil matters involving properties worth hundreds of millions of rupees and
             criminal cases in which persons sentenced to death facing gallows under
             untold agony and persons sentenced to life imprisonment and kept in
             incarceration for long years, persons suffering from undue delay in service
             matters, Government or private, persons awaiting the disposal of case... ...
             ... etc. etc. are all standing in a long serpentine queue for years with the
             fond hope of getting into the Courts and having their grievances redressed,
             the busybodies, meddlesome interlopers, wayfarers or officious interveners
             having absolutely no public interest except for personal gain or private
             profit either of themselves or as proxy of others or for any other extraneous
             motivation or for glare of publicity break the queue muffing their faces by
             wearing the mask of public interest litigation and get into the Courts by
             filing vexatious and frivolous petitions and thus criminally waste the
             valuable time of the Courts, as a result of which the queue standing outside
             the doors of the Courts never moves, which piquant situation creates
             frustration in the minds of the genuine litigants and resultantly they lose
             faith in the administration of our judicial system..." [Emphasis supplied]

In the instant case, the Appellant is not just pressurizing the Respondent public
authority by seeking clarification/confirmation, but also harassing them by filing
multiple queries followed by reminders, e-mail communications etc. Not to forget



                                                                               Page 24 of 31

                                                        CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

to mention the fact that the Respondent has even relied upon several orders of this
Commission. The Commission unavoidably has to mention the fact that the
Appellant is in a habit of filing RTI Applications in a numbered manner i.e., 'RTI
Application No. 1, ... No. 2, ... No. 3 and No. 4'. Further, the Appellant has a set
pattern of enclosing all or more than one RTI Application, which is not just
confusing but irksome as well. It is pertinent to mention herein that the Appellant
has repeatedly cited that he has not been provided a fair hearing by the First
Appellate Authority, which is absurd because the Appellant even in the First
Appeal has clubbed the grounds of all the 4 RTI Applications, which is in
actuality, a bewildering document and yet, the First Appellate Authority, in the
same way, has clubbed all his First Appeals and reminders and provided a detailed
order. In this regard, the Commission counsels the Appellant that 
Section 6(1)
 of
the RTI Act, defines as under:



   6.(1) A person, who desires to obtain any information under this Act, shall make a
   request in writing or through electronic means in English or Hindi or in the official
   language of the area in which the application is being made, accompanying such fee
   as may be prescribed, to-

   ...

   ...

                                                                  [Emphasis supplied]

A plain reading of the aforesaid Section makes it amply clear that the Parliament of
India, while enacting the Act has categorically provided a right to an Indian citizen
that he/she shall make a request and not requests. Adding on to it, the Appellant
has made it a practice that he sends e-mail reminders with subject-line "Awaiting
FAA Hearing Notice - w.r.t 8 (Eight) 1st Appeals" ; "Awaiting FAA Hearing
Notice - w.r.t 9 (Nine) 1st Appeals.



                                                                             Page 25 of 31


                                                       CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

   f. It is further pertinent to mention herein that the Hon'ble High Court of
      Madras in the matter of Public Information Officer, Registrar
      (Administration) vs. B. Bharathi., W.P. No. 26781/2013 dated 17.09.2014
      has also given its opinion about such vexatious litigation crippling the public
      authorities and held as follows:

 
"... The action of the second respondent in sending numerous complaints
            and representations and then following the same with the RTI applications;
            that it cannot be the way to redress his grievance; that he cannot overload
            a public authority and divert its resources disproportionately while
            seeking information and that the dispensation of information should not
            occupy the majority of time and resource of any public authority, as it
            would be against the larger public interest..." [Emphasis supplied]

   g. It is furthermore pertinent to mention herein that the Hon'ble High Court in
      the matter of 
Shail Sahni v. Sanjeev Kumar & Ors., W.P.(C
) 845/2014 has
      stated as under:


            "... Consequently, this Court deems it appropriate to refuse to exercise its
            writ jurisdiction. Accordingly, present petition is dismissed. This Court is
            also of the view that misuse of the 
RTI Act
 has to be appropriately dealt
            with, otherwise the public would lose faith and confidence in this "sunshine
            Act". A beneficial Statute, when made a tool for mischief and abuse must
            be checked in accordance with law..." [Emphasis supplied]

   h. In the matter of Rajni Mendiratta v. Dte. of Education (North West-B].,
      W.P.(C) no. 7911/2015, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi vide its order
      dated 08.10.2015 stated as under:

            "8. ... Though undoubtedly, the reason for seeking the information is not
            required to be disclosed but when it is found that the process of the law is
            being abused, the same become relevant. Neither the authorities created
            under the 
RTI Act
 nor the Courts are helpless if witness the provisions of
            law being abused and owe a duty to immediately put a stop thereto..."



The Commission considers that the Appellant's move to seek voluminous
information followed by his counter to every reply/letter of the Respondent does




                                                                             Page 26 of 31

                                                        CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

not make him a citizen who fights for exposing corruption/arbitrariness and to
improve/correct the governance. Instead, it proves that the Appellant wants to
correct a wrong that has been perceivably done and the only intention is to get
justice for himself. The Appellant rather appears to have converted the provisions
of the 
RTI Act
 as a tool of oppression/intimidation, which the Commission
discourages outrightly.



 
i. In the matter of 
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India vs.
      Shaunak H. Satya and Ors.
, AIR 2011 SC 3336, the Hon'ble Supreme
      Court of India has held as under:


            "... 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and
            existing. This is clear from a combined reading of Section 3 and the
            definitions of 'information' and 'right to information' under Clauses (f) and

            (j) of 
Section 2
 of the Act. If a public authority has any information in the
            form of data or analysed data, or abstracts, or statistics, an applicant may
            access such information, subject to the exemptions in 
Section 8
 of the Act.

            But where the information sought is not a part of the record of a public
            authority, and where such information is not required to be maintained
            under any law or the rules or regulations of the public authority, the Act
            does not cast an obligation upon the public authority, to collect or collate
            such non-available information and then furnish it to an applicant. The
            right to information is a fundamental right as enshrined in 
Article 10
 of the
            Constitution of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has declared in a
            plethora of cases that the most important value for the functioning of a
            healthy and well-informed democracy is transparency. However it is
            necessary to make a distinction in regard to information intended to bring
            transparency, to improve accountability and to reduce corruption, falling
            under 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and (c) and other information which may not have a
            bearing on accountability or reducing corruption. The competent
            authorities under the 
RTI Act
 will have to maintain a proper balance so
            that while achieving transparency, the demand for information does not
            reach unmanageable proportions affecting other public interests, which
            include efficient operation of public authorities and government,
            preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information and optimum use..."



                                                                              Page 27 of 31


 
CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

j. In the matter of 
Central Board of Secondary Education & Anr. V. Aditya
  Bandopadhyay & Ors.
, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held as
  under:


  "33. ... 
The Act
 seeks to bring about a balance between two conflicting interests,
  as harmony between them is essential for preserving democracy. One is to bring
  about transparency and accountability by providing access to information under
  the control of public authorities. The other is to ensure that the revelation of
  information, in actual practice, does not conflict with other public interests
  which include efficient operation of the governments, optimum use of limited
  fiscal resources and preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information. The
  preamble to the Act specifically states that the object of the Act is to harmonise
  these two conflicting interests...

  ...

 
37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and right to
  information are intended to be formidable tools in the hands of responsible
  citizens to fight corruption and to bring in transparency and accountability... ...
  Indiscriminate and impractical demands or directions under 
RTI Act
 for
  disclosure of all and sundry information (unrelated to transparency and
  accountability in the functioning of public authorities and eradication of
  corruption) would be counter-productive as it will adversely affect the efficiency
  of the administration and result in the executive getting bogged down with the
  non-productive work of collecting and furnishing information. 
The Act
 should
  not be allowed to be misused or abused, to become a tool to obstruct the national
  development and integration, or to destroy the peace, tranquility and harmony
  among its citizens. Nor should it be converted into a tool of oppression or
  intimidation of honest officials striving to do their duty. The nation does not want
  a scenario where 75% of the staff of public authorities spends 75% of their time
  in collecting and furnishing information to applicants instead of discharging
  their regular duties. The threat of penalties under the 
RTI Act
 and the pressure
  of the authorities under the 
RTI Act
 should not lead to employees of a public
  authorities prioritizing 'information furnishing', at the cost of their normal and
  regular duties..." [Emphasis supplied]

k. In the matter of 
Mr. Amit Pande vs. CPIO & General Manager (Legal),
  Small Industries Development Bank of India, Lucknow
 vide File No.
  CIC/SM/A/2010/001398/SG, a coordinate Bench of this Commission vide
  order dated 07.09.2011 has held as under:




                                                                           Page 28 of 31


                                             CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

It is relevant to mention that the Supreme Court of Indian in Gurudevdatta
VKSSS Maryadit & Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors. Appeal (Civil) No.
2298/2001 (judgment dated 22/03/2001) has clarified as follows:

       "... it is a cardinal principle of interpretation of stature that the
       words of a statute must be understood in their natural, ordinary or
       popular sense and construed according to their grammatical
       meaning, unless such construction leads to some absurdity or unless
       there is something in the context or in the object of the statute to
       suggest to the contrary. The golden rule is that the words of a statute
       must prima facie be given their ordinary meaning. It is yet another
       rule of construction that when the words of the statue are clear,
       plain and unambiguous, then the Courts are bound to give effect to
       that meaning, irrespective of the consequences. It is said that the
       words themselves best declare the intention of the law giver. The
       Courts have adhered to the principle that efforts should be made to
       give meaning to each and every word used by the legislature and it
       is not a sound principle of construction to brush aside words in a
       statute as being inapposite surpluses, if they can have a proper
       application in circumstances conceivable within the contemplation
       of the statute."

The principle laid down above has been reiterated time and again by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The golden rule of statutory
interpretation, as laid down by the Supreme Court of India, has the force of
law. If the said rule is to be applied, then the term 'a request' must be given
its natural and ordinary meaning, which certainly does not appear to mean
'one category of information'. If at all a meaning is ascribed to the term ' a
request', it would mean 'an application' seeking information under the 
RTI
Act
. Even from a plain reading of 
Section 6(1)
 and 
7(1)
 of the RTI Act,
there does not appear to be any embargo on the scope of such request or
application. In other words, this Bench rules that there is no legal
requirement on an applicant's part to restrict the scope of her RTI
application only one subject matter.

...

At this juncture, it would be pertinent to mention that what constitutes a
'single subject matter' has neither been defined in the 
RTI Act
, the rules
and regulations framed thereunder and not even by the then
Chief/Information Commissioners in the said decisions. No parameters
have been laid down by the then Chief/Information Commissioner by which
an applicant and the PIO can determine whether the information sought
pertains to one-subject matter. In the absence of any means to determine
what tantamount to 'one subject matter', the PIO can, at his discretion,



                                                                    Page 29 of 31

                                                        CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

             furnish part information claiming that the remaining information sought in
             the RTI application pertains to a different subject matter for which a
             separate RTI application is required to be filed. The exercise of such
             discretion by the PIO is likely to be subjective resulting in arbitrary
             curtailment of the fundamental right to information of citizens and
             unnecessary expenditure of money. In the absence of any clear definition of
             what 'one category of request' means it would only lead to arbitrary
             refusals of information under the 
RTI Act
, leading to clogging of the
             appellate mechanisms. However, rules framed by the competent authority
             could put some reasonable restrictions on the length of the RTI
             application."



In view of the foregoing, the Commission is of the considered opinion that the
Respondent has provided appropriate and permissible information to the Appellant
pertaining to the Accounts section and the Vigilance section. In addition, the
Respondent had also given an opportunity to the Appellant to remit requisite
amount as photocopying charges to obtain the relevant information, which the
Appellant has not remitted till date. Keeping in view the aforesaid analysis, the
Commission upholds the decision of the CPIO as well as the order of the First
Appellate Authority.

With the above observations, the instant Second Appeal is dismissed with no relief.
Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.

                       The Appeal, hereby, stands dismissed.



                                      Amita Pandove (अ मता पांडव)
                                      Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु त)
                                       दनांक / Date: 24.05.2021





                                                                             Page 30 of 31

                                              CIC/MPOTR/A/2018/637409

Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत          त)

B. S. Kasana (बी. एस. कसाना)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26105027


Addresses of the parties:

1. The First Appellate Authority (FAA)
Mormugao Port Trust,
Administrative Office, Headland,
Sada, Goa - 403 804


2. The Central Public Information Officer,
Mormugao Port Trust (Vigilance),
Administrative Office, Headland,
Sada, Goa - 403 804


3. Shri Samir Sardana





                                                            Page 31 of 31