[Cites 
1
, Cited by 
2
]




Central Information Commission


Rakesh Kumar Gupta vs Central Information Commission on 16 September, 2021


Author: 
Vanaja N Sarna


Bench: 
Vanaja N Sarna


                           क य सुचना आयोग
                   CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
                            बाबा गंगनाथ माग
                           Baba Gangnath Marg
                       मुिनरका, नई द ली - 110067
                       Munirka, New Delhi-110067

                                      File no.: - CIC/CICOM/A/2020/661396
In the matter of:
Rakesh Kumar Gupta
                                                              ... Appellant
                                       VS
Central Public information Officer,
RTI Cell, Central Information Commission,
Baba Gang Nath Marg, Munirka, New Delhi - 110067
                                                              ... Respondent


RTI application filed on          :   18/12/2019
CPIO replied on                   :   24/12/2019
First appeal filed on             :   24/12/2019

First Appellate Authority order   :   13/01/2020
Second Appeal Filed on            :   22/01/2020
Date of Hearing                   :   15/09/2021
Date of Decision                  :   15/09/2021

The following were present:

Appellant: Heard over phone
Respondent: Shri S K Chitkara, CPIO & Dr to CIC(YS), heard over phone

Information Sought:

The appellant has sought the following information:

1. Provide the soft copy of records available with CIC related to appellant's
cases in DVD or email.

Details of cases are given below.

Cases are related to Delhi Police and Supreme Court of India

i) CIC/DEPOL/A/2018/619642

ii) CIC/DEPOL/A/2018/621994

iii) and other related files




                                        1


 2. Provide inspection of Point 1 records (this will be excised, when Soft copy
given by the Public Authority does not contain information given by him. Or
alternatively Point 1 soft copy denied.

3. Provide soft copy of records pointed out after inspection

Grounds for Second Appeal
The CPIO did not provide the desired information.



Submissions made by Appellant and Respondent during Hearing:

The appellant submitted that the decision quoted by the CPIO to deny the
information is not relevant as he is seeking his own information which has
nothing to do with a third party. He also submitted that even though the same
information was provided to him twice in connection with other RTI
applications, however, in both the applications the documents filed by him
were tampered. He also submitted that he had filed written submissions on
22.08.2021 and they may be taken on record while deciding the case.

In his written submissions he had stated that there is corruption in the
organisation as his file bearing No. CIC/VS/A/2014/001287 was tampered by an
officer and that despite his requests, his correspondence address has not been
changed due to which he does not receive any letter from the Commission. He
had also stated that he has filed many non-compliance letters but no action
has been taken on them. He has requested the following points to be
considered:

    1. To take safeguard to avoid tampering of Public Authority records for
        malafide reasons.

    2. To issue Standard operating Procedure to be adopted to deal with
    tampering of records, including filing of FIR. (Tampering of soft files need
    multiple persons involvement).

    3. To issue Standard operating Procedure to deal with officers who are not
    following the CIC office procedure.

        a. Change of address in CIC soft records is the responsibility of the
    respective Registry.

        b. Hearing of cases - Early hearing and review hearing not followed
    although CIC has guidelines.

        c. Time bound disposal of Non compliance cases, review request and
    early hearing request.

        d. Issue of financial penalty on the officers who are at fault and to
    compensate the RTI Applicant from penalty collected from them.



                                       2


 The CPIO submitted that an appropriate reply was given to the appellant on
24.12.2019.



Observations:

From a perusal of the relevant case records, it is noted that the CPIO in his
reply had denied the information while stating that the information sought
relates to those cases of the appellant which have already been heard and
decided. Therefore, in view of observations of the Hon'ble Madras High Court
in W.P. No. 26781/2013 dated 17.09.2014, the information was not given.



The Commission is in agreement with the reply of the CPIO as the information
sought by him is related to his own cases. In this regard, the relevant part of
the judgment relied on by the CPIO is extracted below:

"Insofar as query (iv) is concerned, we fail to understand as to how the second
respondent is entitled to justify his claim for seeking the copies of his own
complaints and appeals. It is needless to say that they are not the information
available within the knowledge of the petitioner; on the other hand,
admittedly, they are the documents of the second respondent himself, and
therefore, if he does not have copies of the same, he has to blame himself and
he cannot seek those details as a matter of right, thinking that the High Court
will preserve his frivolous applications as treasures/valuable assets. Further,
those documents cannot be brought under the definition "information" as
defined under 
Section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act. Therefore, we reject the contention of
the second respondent in this aspect."



Having said so, it is also a fact that the information sought by the appellant
consists of two parts, one consists of all the documents which were filed by the
appellant himself and the other part of the documents which were filed by the
respondent authority. Therefore, the above referred judgment is applicable to
the first part of the documents only and in so far as the documents filed by the
respondent authority are concerned, these could have been provided to the
appellant.



Since the appellant had vehemently argued that even though these documents
were provided to him but they were tampered, the CPIO is therefore directed
to provide him an opportunity to inspect the relevant documents connected to
the above mentioned files. With regard to the general suggestions given by the
appellant, it is to be noted by him that CIC has standard guidelines which are

                                        3

 followed while fixing the cases and for handling the cases. Even though
everything that is followed is not available in black and white, however, the
basic operating procedure is the same for all the Registries.



 Decision:

 In view of the above, the CPIO is directed to offer inspection of the relevant
available records related to the case files mentioned by the appellant in his RTI
application at a mutually convenient date and time, within 15 days from the
date of receipt of this order. The appellant is directed to avail of the said offer
within a period of 10 days from the date of receipt of the letter of inspection
from the respondent authority, failing which no further opportunity will be
provided to him. The CPIO is also directed to provide the first ten pages free of
cost to the appellant after which relevant photocopying charges can be
demanded.

               The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                             Vanaja N. Sarna (वनजा एन. सरना)
                                       Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मा णत स या पत ित)


A.K. Assija (ऐ.के. असीजा)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011- 26182594 /
 दनांक / Date





                                        4