[Cites 
37
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Santosh Kumar Sahu vs Land And Development Office on 15 February, 2022


Author: 
Heeralal Samariya


Bench: 
Heeralal Samariya


                            केन्द्रीय सूचना आयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                        बाबा गंगनाथ मागग, मुननरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                        नई दिल्ली, New Delhi -110067

 दितीय अपील संख्या / Second Appeal No.:             CIC/LADOF/A/2019/657522
Santosh Kumar Sahu                                    .....अपीलकताा /Appellant

                           VERSUS


Public Information Officer Under RTI,
Deputy Land & Development Officer,
Ministry Of Urban Development,
Land & Development Office,
Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi-110011.
                                                      ...प्रदतवािीगण/Respondent


 Relevant facts emerging from Second Appeal:

 RTI application filed on          :   19.04.2019
 CPIO replied on                   :   03.05.2019
 First appeal filed on             :   17.06.2019
 First Appellate Authority order   :   26.07.2019
 Second Appeal received at CIC     :   Nil
 Date of Interim Hearing           :   04.10.2021
 Date of Interim Decision          :   04.10.2021
 Date of final Hearing             :   13.01.2022
 Date of final Decision            :   15.02.2022


                       सूचना आयुक्त: श्री हीरालाल सामररया
             Information Commissioner:        Shri Heeralal Samariya
 Information sought
:

The Appellant sought information as under:



   1. Please provide a copy of the lease agreement under which the Indian Airlines
      Corporation (or under any other name like Indian Airlines Limited or Air India
      Limited or Indian Airlines corporation or Air India Corporation or under any
      name) was given the lease of the property currently known as Air India
      Colony, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi Pin 110057.

   2. Whether the property is still under lease or has been returned back or taken
      over by the ministry or any authority. If so the terms and condition, reason for
      which the property has been returned or taken over. Please provide copy of
      such letter.

   3. Whether Ministry had made any agreement or tie-up with NBCC for
      development of the said property. If so please provide details and copy of such
      agreement, negotiation, tie-up etc made with NBCC.



PIO furnished reply, vide letter dated 03.05.2019, as under:



Dissatisfied with the response received from the PIO, the Appellant filed a First
Appeal, vide letter dated 17.06.2019.



The FAA, vide order dated 26.07.2019, held as under:

 Written submission has been received from Appellant, vide letter dated 16.09.2021,
for perusal before the Commission and taken on record.



Written submission has been received from PIO, vide letter dated 27.09.2021, as
under:



Grounds for Second Appeal:

 The PIO has not provided correct information to the Appellant.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present: -



Appellant: present on phone

Respondent: not present

Appellant submitted that he has not received the relevant information of the PIO till
date and further, expressed his dissatisfaction towards the initial reply of the PIO.



Interim Decision

At the outset, Commission takes grave exception to the absence of PIO during
hearing without intimating any reasons thereof. Accordingly, PIO is hereby directed
to file a written explanation justifying the said conduct, failing which an action under

Section 20(1)
 and 
20(2)
 of the RTI Act will be initiated against him/her, if necessary.



PIO is directed to ensure that his written submission reaches the Commission
within 30 days from the date of receipt of this order, failing which ex-parte
action will be initiated against him/her.



Commission has gone through the case records and on the basis of proceedings
during hearing takes grave exception of both FAA and PIO wherein the Appellant
has been asked to state the purpose of seeking the information or justify his stake.
Both FAA and PIO are hereby cautioned against asking for any such clarifications
from RTI Applicants as under 
RTI Act
, an applicant is not required to provide any
reasons for seeking information. 
Section 6(2)
 of the RTI Act is reproduced here for
clarity:



       "6. Request for obtaining information.--



       (2)   An applicant making request for information shall not be required to give
             any reason for requesting the information or any other personal details
             except those that may be necessary for contacting him."

 Nevertheless, Commission has gone through the case records and observes that PIO
has denied the relevant information under the garb of 
Section 8(1)(d)
 and (e) of the

RTI Act, 2005
. Further no justification in respect of the same has been provided.



In view of the foregoing, Commission provides an opportunity to the PIO to submit
a detailed written submission substantiating their averred denial under 
section
8(1)(d)
 and (e) of the instant RTI Application. The written submission of PIO
justifying the said denial of information as directed shall reach the Commission
within 15 days from the date of receipt of this order with a copy duly endorsed to
the Appellant. Further, if the Appellant desires to counter the submission of PIO, he
may submit the same to the Commission within 15 days of receipt of the CPIO's
submission.

                          FINAL DECISION PROCEEDINGS:



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present: -



Appellant: not present

Respondent: Mr. Shiv Kumar, SO & Rep. of CPIO.



Pursuant to the interim order dated 04.10.2021, this bench has received written
submission from both the parties as follows

    • Written submission of the appellant dated 30.12.2021 :
     • Written submission of the PIO dated 30.12.2021:



Commission has gone through the case records and written submissions of the both
parties and observes that the moot question of this proceeding is to decide whether
denial of the information pertaining to the lease agreement under the garb of

section 8(1)(d)
 & (e) is justified or not. In view of the foregoing, Commission
deems it expedient to refer to one of the decisions of the Commission in case no.
CIC/DOURD/A/2017/148703-BJ dated 07.03.2019 wherein similar matter was
dealt at length. The relevant portion of the said order is produced herein below
follows:

"

      Having heard both the parties and on perusal of the available records, the Commission
      observed that in its reply, the CPIO did not expressly specify the provision under 
Section
      8 (1)
 claimed to deny the information. Moreover, even the Third Party in its letter
      dated 06.04.2017 conveying their objection to disclose the information only cited
      
Section 8 (1) (d)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 without giving justifications/ reasons for claiming
      the exemption. It is a settled principle of law that disclosure of information is the only
      established Rule for promoting transparency and accountability in the working of every
      public authority and exemption can only be claimed when the information sought falls
      within the gamut of exemptions provided under 
Section 8 (1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005. Mere
      claim of the Respondent that the third party had denied the disclosure of information
      cannot be a ground for denial of information under the 
RTI Act, 2005
.

      The Commission also observed that as per the provisions of 
Section 19 (5)
 of the RTI
      Act, 2005, in an Appeal proceeding, the onus to prove that a denial of a request was
 justified shall be on the CPIO. Neither the Respondent present during the hearing nor the
CPIO responding to the RTI application, could justify their position as to how the
disclosure of information would be in contravention to any of the provisions enshrined
under 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act, 2005. 
In this context, the Commission referred to the
decision of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of 
Dy. Commissioner of
Police v. D.K. Sharma, WP (C) No.
 12428 of 2009 dated 15.12.2010, wherein it was held
as under:


  "6. This Court is inclined to concur with the view expressed by the CIC that in order to
  deny the information under the 
RTI Act
 the authority concerned would have to show a
  justification with reference to one of the specific clauses under 
Section 8 (1)
 of the RTI
  Act. In the instant case, the Petitioner has been unable to discharge that burden. The
  mere fact that a criminal case is pending may not by itself be sufficient unless there is a
  specific power to deny disclosure of the information concerning such case."

  Moreover, as per the provisions of 
Section 7 (8) (i)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, where a request
  for disclosure of information is rejected, the CPIO shall communicate the reasons for
  such rejection.

  Furthermore, in the instant matter, it cannot be said that the documents sought were in the
  exclusive custody of the Third Party since it pertained to transfer of property through
  Lease by way of a contractual arrangement wherein the Respondent Public Authority was
  also an equal stakeholder being Lessor thereby having access to records. A reference can
  also be made to the order of the Hon'ble High Court of Nagpur in Sunflag Iron & Steel
  Company Ltd. V. State Information Commission Writ Petition No. 863/ 2012 dated
  14.11.2014 wherein it was allowed to disclose the Memorandum of Understanding to
  which the Government of Maharashtra was party on the ground that the
  information was not exclusively related to the third party. The relevant observations
  of the Court are as under:

  "10. After hearing the learned advocates for the respective parties and considering the
  judgments referred above, in my view, it cannot be said that in each and every case the
  notice under 
Section 19(4)
 of the Act of 2005 is required to be issued to third party and
  hearing is to be afforded to the third party before any directions for supplying the
  information are given. The Division Bench of Delhi High Court has considered the
  scope of 
Section 11(1)
 of the Act of 2005 and has laid down that the notice is
  required to be given to third party in case information prima facie is considered as
  confidential and if it affects the rights of privacy of the third party.

  12. If the impugned order is examined in the light of the above referred judgments, it has
  to be held that the directions given by the Commission to provide the information as
  sought vide Item no.5 of the application given by the respondent no.1 cannot be said to be
  an information which can be considered as confidential and in the exclusive possession
         of the petitioner, it being a Memorandum of Understanding to which the
        Government of Maharashtra is a party. However, the information sought
        by the respondent no.4 videItem No.4 of his application, cannot be provided
        to the respondent no.4 without hearing the petitioner and considering its
        objections. The information sought by the respondent no.4 vide Item no.4 of
        his application, does not specify the documents in respect of which the
        information is sought and the directions to provide the information on such
        vague request may prejudice the petitioner.

    13. The reliance placed on behalf of the petitioner on the judgment given in the
        case of R.K. Jain V/s. Union of India & Anr. (cited supra) is misdirected
        inasmuch as in this case, the information sought related to the annual
        confidential reports of the third party which objected to the providing of the
        information. In the judgment given in the case of Surupsingh Hrya Naik V/s.
        State of Maharashtra & Ors. (cited supra) again the issue was about giving
        of information relating to the hospital records. In the judgment given in the
        case of SKIL Infrastructure Private Limited & Anr. V/s. State Information
        Commissioner & Ors. (cited supra) the issue about supplying the information
        which was not exclusively in the custody of the third party and which related
        to the transactions ofthe State Government, did not fall for consideration.
        The judgments relied on behalf of the petitioner do not assist the
        petitioner. As far asthe facts of the present case are concerned, information
        sought by the respondent no.4 vide item no.5 of his application is
        concerning the Memorandum of Understanding to which the Government
        of Maharashtra is party and it cannot be said that the information is
        exclusively related to the petitioner. The directions issued by the Commission
        to provide the information to the respondent no.4 sought vide Item no.5 of
        his application cannot be faulted with."



The Commission also places reliance on the decision of the Hon'ble High Court
of Madras in 
VV Mineral v. Director of Geology and Mining, Writ Petition (MD)
No.5427/2007
 dated25/06/2007 wherein the following was held:


        "11.Therefore, the principal contention that a right accrues to the
        petitioner to object may be correct in the context if a document is exclusively
        submitted by any person to the Government authorities such as property
        statements, income tax returns etc., but in a case of lease deeds and
        transport permits which emanate from the statutory authorities and where the
        petitioner cannot be said to be in exclusive possession, he cannot have a right
        to object to its being divulged as a third party. The lease deeds pertaining to
        minerals as well as transport permits are not documents prepared or to be
        kept by a prospecting mine operator but prospecting a mine or mineral is a
        privilege conferred by the State to the individuals, who accepts the norms
        prescribed under Mines and Minerals Act 1957 and the rules framed
        thereunder.

        12. In the present case, when the third respondent as an Information Officer,
        ordering notice to the petitioner and taking their objection and refusing to
        furnish the documents sought for by a citizen is clearly beyond the scope of
        the 
RTI Act
. If the information is available with the State and such
        information is in exclusive custody of the State, the question of seeking any
        opinion from the third party on such issues may not arise especially, when
        they are public documents. By disclosure of such information, no privilege or
        business interests of the petitioner are affected. On the other hand, such a

                                                                            Page 9 of 16

         disclosure may help any party to act upon those documents and take
        appropriate steps."



The Commission was appalled to learn that the information pertaining to the lists
of allotments, terms & conditions of the lease, complete procedure relating to
grant of lease starting from the submission of application till allotment of
properties, details of monitoring authority etc. was not available with the
Respondent whereas the same should have been uploaded on its website under

Section 4 (1) (b)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.



The Commission however observed that a voluntary disclosure of all
information that ought to be displayed in the public domain should be the
rule and members of public who having to seek information should be an
exception. An open government, which is the cherished objective of the 
RTI Act
,
can be realised only if all public offices comply with proactive disclosure norms.

Section 4(2)
 of the RTI Act mandates every public authority to provide as much
information suo- motu to the public at regular intervals through various means of
communications, including the Internet, so that the public need not resort to the
use of 
RTI Act
. Thus, information relating to allotment of alternative plots should
be disclosed suo motu in the public domain for the ease and convenience of the
public at large.



 
[Emphasis Supplied]

The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of 
CBSE and Anr. Vs. Aditya
Bandopadhyay and Ors
 2011 (8) SCC 497 held as under:


        "37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and right to
        information are intended to be formidable tools in the hands of responsible
        citizens to fight corruption and to bring in transparency and accountability.
        The provisions of 
RTI Act
 should be enforced strictly and all efforts should be
        made to bring to light the necessary information under Clause (b) of 
Section
        4(1)
 of the Act which relates to securing transparency and accountability in
        the working of public authorities and in discouraging corruption."

 
The Commission also observes the Hon'ble Delhi High Court ruling in WP
        (C) 12714/2009 
Delhi Development Authority v. Central Information
        Commission and Another
 (delivered on: 21.05.2010), wherein it was held as
        under:


        "16.It also provides that the information should be easily accessible and to the extent
        possible should be in electronic format with the Central Public Information Officer
        or the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be. The word disseminate
        has also been defined in the explanation to mean - making the information known or
        communicating the information to the public through notice boards, newspapers,
        public announcements, media broadcasts, the internet, etc. It is, therefore, clear from
        a plain reading of 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act that the information, which a public
        authority is obliged to publish under the said section should be made available to the
        public and specifically through the internet. There is no denying that the petitioner is
        duty bound by virtue of the provisions of 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act to publish the
        information indicated in 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and 
4(1)(c)
 on its website so that the public
        have minimum resort to the use ofthe 
RTI Act
 to obtain the information."



Furthermore, High Court of Delhi in the decision of 
General Manager Finance Air


                                                                                  Page 10 of 16

 India Ltd & Anr v. Virender Singh, LPA No.
 205/2012, Decided On: 16.07.2012 had
held as under:


         "8. 
The RTI Act
, as per its preamble was enacted to enable the citizens to
         secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order
         to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public
         authority. An informed citizenry and transparency of information have been
         spelled out as vital to democracy and to contain
         corruption and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities accountable
         to the governed. The said legislation is undoubtedly one of the most
         significant enactments of independent India and a landmark in governance.
         The spirit of the legislation is further evident from various provisions thereof
         which require public authorities to:

      A. Publish inter alia:



       i) the procedure followed in the decision making process;



      ii) the norms for the discharge of its functions;



         iii) rules, regulations, instructions manuals and records used by its
         employees in discharging of its functions;

         iv) the manner and execution of subsidy programmes including the
         amounts allocatedand the details of beneficiaries of such programmes;



         v) the particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or authorizations
         granted. [see 
Section 4(1) (b)
, (iii), (iv), (v); (xii) & (xiii)].

         B. Suo moto provide to the public at regular intervals as much information
         as possible [see 
Section 4(2)
]."

A reference can also be made to the above referred decision of the Apex Court in the
matter of 
Ferani Hotels Private Ltd. vs. the State Information Commissioner, Greater
Mumbai & Ors.
 in Civil Appeal Nos. 9064-9065 of 2018 (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos.
32073-32074/ 2015) dated 27.09.2018, wherein it was decided that:
15 .................. In terms of sub-section (2) of 
Section 6
 of the said Act, there is no
mandate on an applicant to give any reason for requesting the information, i.e., anybody
should be able to obtain the information as long as it is part of the public record of a
public authority. Thus, even private documents submitted to public authorities may,
under certain situations, form part of public record. In this behalf, we may usefully refer
to 
Section 74
 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, defining 'public documents' as under:


       74. Public documents - The following documents are public documents:-



        (1) Documents forming the acts, or records of the acts--



         (i) of the sovereign authority,


        (ii) of official bodies and tribunals, and

         (iii) of public officers, legislative, judicial and executive, [of any part of
         India orof the Commonwealth], or of a foreign country; [of any part of India
         or of the Commonwealth], or of a foreign country;"

     (2) Public records kept [in any State] of private documents.



                                                                             Page 11 of 16


 16. The only exemption from disclosure of information, of whatever nature, with the
public authority is as per 
Sections 8
 & 
9
 of the said Act. Thus, unless the information
sought for falls under these provisions, it would be mandatory for the public authorities
to disclose the information to an applicant."

The Commission also observed that the issues raised in the RTI application
pertained to the larger public interest and hence should be answered in
accordance with the provisions of the Act. Moreover, since the allotment of land
on lease was made long back by the Respondent Public Authority there appears
no justification to keep it secret at this stage. The Commission finds that the decision
of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in 
Jamia Millia Islamia v. Ikramuddin WP (C) No.

5677/2011 dated 22.11.2011, is pertinent in this matter wherein it was observed that:


"The act of entering into an agreement with any other person/entity by a public
authority would be a public activity, and as it would involve giving or taking of
consideration, which would entail involvement of public funds, the agreement would
also involve public interest. Every citizen is entitled to know on what terms the
Agreement/settlement has been reached by the petitioner public authority with any
other entity or individual."

The Commission also draws reference to the judgment of the Division bench of
Jharkhand High Court, in 
State of Jharkhand v. Navin Kumar SInhga and Anr.
, AIR
2008 Jharkhand 19 dated 08/08/2007, wherein it was held as under:




         "26        The question therefore that falls for consideration is as to whether
         disclosure of
         various documents submitted by the bidders is a trade secret or
         commercial confidence or intellectual property. Prima facie, we are of the
         view that once a decision is taken in the matter of grant of tender, there is
         no justification to keep it secret. People have a right to know the basis on
         which the decision has been taken. If tenders are invited by the public
         authority and on the basis of tender documents, the eligibility of a
         tenderor or a bidder is decided, then those tender documents cannot be
         secret, that too, after the tender is decided and work order is issued on the
         ground that it will amount to disclosure of trade secret or commercial
         confidence. If the authorities of Government refuse to disclose the
         document, the very purpose of the Act will be frustrated. Moreover,
         disclosure of information, sought for by the petitioner, cannot and shall not
         be a trade secret or commercial confidence; rather disclosure of such
         information shall be in public interest, inasmuch as it will show the
         transparency in the activities of the Government.

         27 Since the tender process is completed and contract has been awarded, it
         will
         not influence the contract. Besides the above, a citizen has a right to know
         the genuineness of a document submitted by the tenderer in the matter of
         grant of tender for consultancy work or for any other work. As noticed above,
         the tender process is completed and the contract has been awarded,
         therefore, it will not influence the contract. In any view of the matter, the
         document in question cannot be treated as trade secret or commercial
         confidence. In our considered opinion a contract entered into by the public
         authority with a private person cannot be treated as confidential after
         completion of contract."

Moreover, the observation of the Division Bench of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the
matter of 
Associated Journals Ltd and Anr. vs. Land and Development Office, LPA
 10/2019

                                                                            Page 12 of 16

 & CM Nos. 566/2019 & 649/2019 dated 28.02.2019 wherein while confirming the single
bench decision dated 21.12.2018, the Division Bench upheld the eviction order passed
against National Herald Publisher Associated Journals Limited to vacate ITO
premises where Herald House is situated with the following observations:


 
"53......The principles of law canvassed by the learned Senior Counsel appearing
        for the appellant and 
laid down in
 the case of S.Sundaram Pillai (Supra) and
        
Shrikrishna Oil Mill vs. Radhakrishan Ramchandra
, (2002) 2 SCC 23 pertaining to
        tenancy law cannot be applied in a case like this where the lease of government
        properties is granted to an organization or an establishment to carry out a specific
        act or purpose and if for a long period of time, the said purpose is not carried out and
        when there is a breach which even though to some extent may have been rectified
        when the proceedings for breach were going on, in our considered view, cannot be
        a ground for holding that the breach has been rectified in full and, therefore, there
        cannot be determination. It is the case where admittedly printing activities and
        publication of the newspaper were not being carried out in the premises when the
        inspection took place initially on 26th September, 2016 and even when the second
        inspection took place on 9th April, 2018 what was found was that the basement was
        lying more or less vacant and the fourth floor was being used for lessee for its
        office."




With regard to providing a clear and cogent response to the Appellant, the
Commission referred to the decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in 
J P
Aggarwal v. Union of India (WP (C
) no. 7232/2009 wherein it was held that:




        " 7"it is the PIO to whom the application is submitted and it is who is
        responsible for ensuring that the information as sought is provided to the
        applicant within the statutory requirements of the Act. 
Section 5(4)
 is
        simply to strengthen the authority of the PIO within the department; if
        the PIO finds a default by those from whom he has sought information.
        The PIO is expected to recommend a remedial action to be taken". 
The
        RTI Act
 makes the PIO the pivot for enforcing the implementation of the
        Act."



        8.............The PIO is expected to apply his / her mind, duly analyse the
        material before him / her and then either disclose the information sought
        or give grounds for non-disclosure."



The Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the case of 
Shri Vivek Mittal v. B.P. Srivastava,
W.P.(C
) 19122/2006 dated 24.08.2009 had upheld the view of the CIC and observed

        ".....that a CPIO cannot escape his obligations and duties by stating that
        persons appointed under him had failed to collect documents and
        information. 
The Act
 as framed, castes obligation upon the CPIOs and fixes
        responsibility in case there is failure or delay in supply of information. It is
        the duty of the CPIOs to ensure that the provisions of the Act are fully
        complied with and in case of default, necessary consequences follow".




Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of R.K. Jain vs Union
of India, LPA No. 369/2018, dated 29.08.2018, held as under:

 
"9 ......................... That apart, the CPIO being custodian of the information
        or
        the documents sought for, is primarily responsible under the scheme of the

                                                                                  Page 13 of 16


RTI Act
 to supply the information and in case of default or dereliction on
         his part, the penal action is to be invoked against him only."
However, regarding the issue of imposition of penalty on the CPIO/PIO under 
Section
20
 of the RTI Act, 2005, the Commission took note of the ruling of Hon'ble Delhi
High Court in W.P.(C) 11271/2009 
Registrar of Companies & Ors v. Dharmendra
Kumar Garg & Anr.
 (delivered on: 01.06.2012) wherein it was held:




        " 61. Even if it were to be assumed for the sake of argument, that the view
        taken by the learned Central Information Commissioner in the impugned
        order was correct, and that the PIOs were obliged to provide the
        information, which was otherwise retrievable by the querist by resort to
        
Section 610
 of the Companies Act, it could not be said that the information
        had been withheld malafide or deliberately without any reasonable cause. It
        can happen that the PIO may genuinely and bonafidely entertain the
        belief and hold the view that the information sought by the querist cannot be
        provided for one or the other reasons. Merely because the CIC eventually
        finds that the view taken by the PIO was not correct, it cannot automatically
        lead to issuance of a showcause notice under 
Section 20
 of the RTI Act and
        the imposition of penalty. The legislature has cautiously provided that only in
        cases of malafides or unreasonable conduct, i.e., where the PIO, without
        reasonable cause refuses to receive the application, or provide the
        information, or knowingly gives incorrect, incomplete or misleading
        information or destroys the information, that the personal penalty on the
        PIO can be imposed. This was certainly not one such case. If the CIC starts
        imposing penalty on the PIOs in every other case, without any justification, it
        would instill a sense of constant apprehension in those functioning as PIOs in
        the public authorities, and would put undue pressure on them. They would not
        be able to ful fill their statutory duties under the 
RTI Act
 with an independent
        mind and with objectivity. Such consequences would not auger well for the
        future development and growth of the regime that the 
RTI Act
 seeks to bring
        in, and may lead to skewed and imbalanced decisions by the PIOs
        Appellate Authorities and the CIC. It may even lead to unreasonable and
        absurd orders and bring the institutions created by the 
RTI Act
 in disrepute."



Similarly, the following observation of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in 
Bhagat Singh
v. CIC & Ors. WP(C
) 3114/2007 are pertinent in this matter:




        "17. This Court takes a serious note of the two year delay in releasing
        information, the lack of adequate reasoning in the orders of the Public
        Information Officer and the Appellate Authority and the lack of application of
        mind in relation to the nature of information sought. The materials on record
        clearly show the lackadaisical approach of the second and third respondent
        in releasing the information sought. However, the Petitioner has not been
        able to demonstrate that they malafidely denied the information sought.
        Therefore, a direction to the Central Information Commission to initiate
        action under 
Section 20
 of the Act, cannot be issued."



Furthermore, the High Court of Delhi in the decision of Col. 
Rajendra Singh v.
Central Information Commission and Anr. WP (C
) 5469 of 2008 dated 20.03.2009 had
held as under:




        "
Section 20
, no doubt empowers the CIC to take penal action and
        direct payment of such compensation or penalty as is warranted. Yet the
        Commission has to be satisfied that the delay occurred was without

                                                                           Page 14 of 16

                   reasonable cause or the request was denied malafidely.

                  ......The preceding discussion shows that at least in the opinion of this
                  Court, there areno allegations to establish that the information was withheld
                  malafide or unduly delayed so as to lead to an inference that petitioner was
                  responsible for unreasonably withholding it."

         The Appellant could not substantiate his claims regarding malafide denial of
         information by the Respondent or for withholding it without any reasonable cause for
         imposition of penalty. Nonetheless, it was observed by the Commission that the
         allotment of government land by MOUD on concessional terms and conditions to
         anybody / organization was a matter of concern for the public at large and that there
         should be no denial of information on this account.



         Decision:



         Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by both the
         parties and in the light of the aforementioned judgments, the Commission directs
         the Respondent to furnish all the details sought by the Appellant in his RTI
         application within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt of this order. The
         Commission also advises the Respondent Public Authority (L&DO) to examine
         the RTI application and suo motu place the details of all leased properties in
         accordance with the provisions of 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act, 2005 on its website
         taking into consideration the larger public interest involved in the matter."



                                                                     [Emphasis Supplied]


Adverting to the supra and keeping in view of the facts of the instant case as well
as closed scrutiny of the case records, Commission observes that as per the
provisions of 
Section 19 (5)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, in an Appeal proceeding, the
onus to prove that a denial of a request was justified shall be on the CPIO.
Neither the Respondent present during the hearing nor the CPIO vide his written
submission dated 14.01.2022, could justify their position as to how the disclosure
of information would be in contravention to any of the provisions enshrined
under 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act, 2005. In view of the foregoing, Commission
directs the PIO to provide the relevant and generic information as sought by the
appellant in the instant RTI Application, free of cost, via speed/registered post. In
case relevant information contains any third-party information or any other
exempted information then same must be redacted prior to furnishing the relevant
information. Commission's directions should be complied within 30 days from
the date of receipt of this order and compliance report to this effect be duly sent
to the Commission by the PIO.



                                                                                   Page 15 of 16


                      The Appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                            Heeralal Samariya (हीरालाल सामररया)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयुक्त)



Authenticated true copy
(अदिप्रमादणत सत्यादपत प्रदत)

Ram Parkash Grover (राम प्रकाश ग्रोवर)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26180514





                                                                      Page 16 of 16