[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Indranil Bhattacharya vs Film And Television Institute, Pune on 30 June, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                           नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/FATIP/A/2022/158775

Indranil Bhattacharya                                      ......अपीलकता /Appellant



                                         VERSUS
                                          बनाम


CPIO,
Film and Television Institute of
India, RTI Cell, Law College Road,
Pune - 411004, Maharashtra.                              .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                      :   31/05/2023
Date of Decision                     :   30/06/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :               Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on             :   17/08/2022
CPIO replied on                      :   24/08/2022
First appeal filed on                :   23/09/2022
First Appellate Authority order      :   21/10/2022
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated           :   13/12/2022




Information sought
:



                                           1


 The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 17.08.2022 seeking the following
information:



"1. Approved minutes of all Governing Council Meetings of Film and Television
Institute of India, held between January 1, 2019 and August 17, 2022, be furnished
to the applicant.



2. The total number of Governing Council Meetings at FTII, along with dates,
between the period January 1, 2019, and August 17, 2022, may be furnished."



The CPIO furnished a pointwise reply to the appellant on 28.03.2022 stating as
under:



"Point No.1 As per 
section 4(1)(b)(viii)
 of RTI Act, 2005 and Paragraph 4.6 of FTII
RTI Manual, the minutes of Boards, Councils, Committees and Other Bodies
consisting of two or more persons cannot be shared with public.



Point No.2 Total 09 Governing Council meetings held at FTII between the period
January 01, 2019 and August 17, 2022. The dates of 09 meetings are as follows
19.02.2019, 18.06.2019, 10.12.2019, 27.12.2019, 25.02.2020, 30.01.2021,
23.04.2021, 23.11.2021 and 25.06.2022."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 23.09.2022. FAA's order
dated 21.10.2022, upheld the reply of CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, appellant approached the Commission with the
instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Not Present.

Respondent: Sayyid Rabeehashmi, Registrar and S K Dekate, Administrative
Officer & CPIO present through Video-Conference.



The written submissions of the Appellant were taken on record stating as under:



      "2. 
Section 7 (1)
 of the RTI Act states as follows: "...the Central Public
Information Officer ... on receipt of a request under 
Section 6
 shall, ... either
provide the information ... or reject the request for any of the reasons specified in

Sections 8
 and 
9
 ..." In other words, information can be rejected invoking 
Sections


                                         2


8
 and 
9
 of the RTI Act. It also provides certain discretionary but not absolute
exemptions under 
Section 24
. In some of these cases, the exemption of
interpretation of information lies with the CIC. However, in the present case, the
CPIO and FAA have sought exemption under 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act. This is
erroneous and misleading. The first and second appeal has clearly explained this
issue and put on record relevant past orders from the CIC and case laws pertaining
to the same.

       3. The appellant humbly submits that the recent Written Submission dated
25.05.2023 by the FAA is misleading and reiterates the same flawed logic and
exemption claimed by the CPIO in his order dated 24.08.2022. In addition, the FAA
has taken recourse to 4.6 of the Manual of Film and Television Institute of India
and has claimed that the Minutes and Statements of boards, councils,
committees, and other bodies consisting of two or more persons" are not relevant
to the public. In other words, the FAA claims that this clause in the manual could
be used to decline the Minutes and Statements sought under 
Sections 6
 and 
7
 of
the RTI Act.



 
Ref Mr. Rajesh Gauhari vs Educational Consultants India
 ... on 18 January

2011


       'The Commission observed that 
Section 4(1)(b)(viii)
 of the RTI Act confers
       power on a public authority to determine whether minutes of meetings of
       its board, councils, committees, and other bodies are open or accessible to
       the public and publish the same. This power of the public authority to
       determine whether minutes of meetings of its board, councils, committees,
       and other bodies shall be open or accessible to the public is solely for the
       purposes of suo moto disclosures by the public authority, as mandated
       under 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act.'


       4. The present CPIO had allowed a similar request for Minutes of Governing
Council meeting and had allowed 100 pages of information to this applicant. But
the CPIO took a 180-degree turn and denied the same information citing 
Section 4

of the Act.



      5. FTII is a public-funded body in the field of media education. Its policies
have national ramifications on present and future students, academics, and
policymakers. Blanket secrecy as claimed under 4.6 of FTII's RTI Manual militates
against the basic tenets and goal of the 
RTI Act
. It is not pro-transparency, but
pro-secrecy. The decisions taken in the Meeting of Boards, Councils, etc are
fundamental to the policymaking at FTII and affect the stakeholders and the



                                         3

 public at large and hence could not be kept outside the purview of the 
RTI Act
. To
claim such information is not relevant to the public is both incorrect and vexatious.



        6. This appellant asserts that clause 4.6 used to decline the Minutes is a
complete violation of the 
Right to Information Act
. This clause introduced in the
Manual falls foul of the Act itself and should be struck down. Moreover, 
Section
4(viii)
 of the RTI Act cannot be used to deny information sought under 
Section 6
 of
the RTI Act. Moreover, this manual was created long after the mandatory period
of 180 days given to Public Authorities to formulate such a Manual and hence this
Manual ought to be quashed.



      7. 
In an important decision Information Commissioner Vanaja Sarna (
Love
Gogia vs Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
 on 29 May 2020) has made the following
observations regarding the role of FAA and I quote:




      The Commission also notes that the manner of dismissal of the first appeal
      by the FAA without granting an opportunity for a personal hearing after the
      complainant has specifically asked for a hearing goes against the principles
      of natural justice. The FAA in this case without hearing the complainant
      concluded that the case needs to be dismissed which reflects unreasonable
      handling of the first appeal, driving the complainant to file this complaint.
      The Commission, therefore, cautions the FAA to strictly follow the RTI
      regime while disposing of appeals and pass a speaking order, after taking
      due cognizance of the merits of each case.



      The FAA is also flawed in its action of issuing non-speaking orders and this
should be noted by the Hon'ble Commission.



       8. This appellant, further, requests the Hon'ble Commission to deter the
CPIO or FAA to introduce a new reason or a fresh exemption category to justify the
denial of information at the stage of Hearing. This practice has been followed by
the same CPIO on previous occasions. This is against the law and the 
RTI Act
, as it
will enable CPIO to reject information on different grounds at different stages of
the process at their convenience.



       9. It is prayed that the Commission takes cognizance of the above facts and
directs the CPIO to supply all denied information to the appellant. Moreover, in
view of the loss incurred by the appellant as the Minutes were required to be
produced before the High Court in WP 8577 of 2019."



                                         4


 Sayyid Rabeehashmi, Registrar invited the attention of the bench to the written
submissions filed by the FAA on 25.05.2023 stating as under:



       "...a reply to the original application under IITI dated 77.08.2022 from Shri
Indranil Bhattacharya was already replied by the PIO vide FTII letter No. F-
230741712022-F.st. dated 24.08.2022 citing the relevant provision of the 
RTI Act,
2005
 and also paragraph 4.6 of Manual of the FTII (As per Chapter-Il, Para (4) (b)
of the 
RTI Act
 2005), which is already available on the Institute's website stating
that the minutes of the various meetings held by the Governing Council of F'TII are
not relevant to the public, as the meetings organized by the FTII Society is for the
purpose of day-to-day supervision/advise for smooth functioning of the
Institute..."



Decision:

The Commission based on a perusal of the facts on record observes that while the
information sought for at point no.1 of the RTI Application seeking copy of "all
meeting minutes" is as inherently defective vis-à-vis 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act as
was already pointed to the Appellant with respect to an earlier Appeal of his
decided vide File No. CIC/FTIP/A/2021/628067 on 17.08.2022 (incidentally the
same date as that of the instant RTI Application) seeking similar information
about minutes of Board meetings. Following is the relevant portion of the earlier
decision:



       "The Commission based on a perusal of the facts on record observes at the
outset that concededly the information sought for at point no.1 of the RTI
Application is not in strict consonance with 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act as no specific
record of meeting has been sought for rather copy of all meeting minutes on
administrative issues has been sought for while insisting that the only specific is
the attendance of the averred officials during whatever period they served the
posts. In other words, to facilitate the Appellant, the CPIO was required to deduce
and interpret the records of all meetings to be able to provide the information.
The Appellant shall note that outstretching the interpretation of 
Section 2(f)
 of the
RTI Act to include deductions and inferences to be drawn by the CPIO is
unwarranted as it casts immense pressure on the CPIOs to ensure that they
provide the correct deduction/inference to avoid being subject to penal provisions
under the 
RTI Act
. For the sake of clarity, the provision of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act
is reproduced hereunder:

      '2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--

      (f) "information" means any material in any form, including records,
      documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars,

                                           5

       orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material
      held in any electronic form and information relating to any private body
      which can be accessed by a public authority under any other law for the
      time being in force;..'
In this regard, the Appellant's attention is drawn towards a judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court on the scope and ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act in the
matter of CBSE vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors.[CIVIL APPEAL NO.6454 of
2011]wherein it was held as under:



      '35. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some misconceptions about
      the 
RTI Act
. 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available
      and existing.........A public authority is also not required to furnish
      information which require drawing of inferences and/or making of
      assumptions. It is also not required to provide `advice' or `opinion' to an
      applicant, nor required to obtain and furnish any `opinion' or `advice' to
      an applicant. The reference to `opinion' or `advice' in the definition of
      `information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers to such material
      available in the records of the public authority. Many public authorities
      have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and opinion to
      the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused with
      any obligation under the 
RTI Act
.' (Emphasis Supplied)

       Further, the contention of the Appellant that the CPIO inappropriately called
out relevancy of the meeting minutes to the Appellant is although considered but
given the nature of the information sought for as observed above, the Commission
finds that considering the provision of 
Section 4(1)(b)(viii)
 of the RTI Act which
allows the public authority to state as a part of suo motu disclosure whether
minutes of the meetings are accessible for public, by liberal interpretation the
CPIO's reply cannot be deemed as unwarranted.



      xxx

      Similarly, as for the contention of the Appellant that no exemption was
invoked for the said denial, the Commission reiterates the above observation that
the CPIO's reply cannot be called into question given the unspecific nature of the
information sought for in the RTI Application."



However, the only distinguishing factor in the instant case is the fact that at point
no.2 of the RTI Application, the CPIO's reply informs of 9 such meetings that were
held over the course of around 3.5 years (i.e Jan, 2019 to Aug, 2022) which
suffices the requirement of specifics lacking at point no.1 of the RTI Application.

                                         6


 
Nonetheless, the fact remains that requiring the CPIO to analyze and determine
the applicability of 
Section 8
 exemptions to the record of meeting minutes of
these 9 meetings may entail interpretation & deduction of records by the CPIO.
For the reasons mentioned as above, the reply of the CPIO is not being adversely
called into question, however, for future, the CPIO & FAA shall bear in mind that
the stipulations of suo motu mandate under 
Section 4(1)(b)(viii)
 of the RTI Act
cannot be quoted as a reply to a RTI Application as has been rightly pointed out
in the CIC order referred to by the Appellant in his written submissions in the
matter of 
Rajesh Gauhari vs Educational Consultants India
 stating as under:


      'The Commission observed that 
Section 4(1)(b)(viii)
 of the RTI Act confers
      power on a public authority to determine whether minutes of meetings of
      its board, councils, committees, and other bodies are open or accessible to
      the public and publish the same. This power of the public authority to
      determine whether minutes of meetings of its board, councils, committees,
      and other bodies shall be open or accessible to the public is solely for the
      purposes of suo moto disclosures by the public authority, as mandated
      under 
Section 4
 of the RTI Act.'

Similarly, the FAA shall note that the "relevance" of meeting minutes to the
public is not a matter for determination when a citizen seeks information by
way of an RTI Application and such determination is an extraneous
consideration for the CPIO & FAA. In other words, the disclosure of the
information sought for in a RTI Application is only subject to the exemptions of

Section 8
 and/or 9 of the 
RTI Act
.

Keeping the above in mind, the Commission is constrained to go with the reply of
the CPIO with the observation that the information sought by the Appellant on
point no. 1 of the RTI application is indeterminate and also appears to be
voluminous in nature, collation and compilation of which would entail diversion of
manpower resources of the Public Authority and thus, cannot be provided in view
of 
Section 7(9)
 of RTI Act. The same can be garnered from the relevant provisions
of 
Section 7(9)
 of RTI Act which is reproduced below for ready reference -



      "...7. Disposal of request.--

                                          xxx
      (9) An information shall ordinarily be provided in the form in which it is
      sought unless it would disproportionately divert the resources of the public
      authority or would be detrimental to the safety or preservation of the
      record in question..."



                                        7


 
It also appears that the Appellant has grossly misconceived the idea of exercising
his Right to Information as being absolute and unconditional. It is rather
unfortunate that even the best of intentions have to not only stand the test of
procedural requirements and fetters 
laid down in
 the 
RTI Act
 but also stand the
test of practicality, a notion well recognised by superior Courts through various
judgments such as the Hon'ble Supreme Court's observation in 
Central Board of
Secondary Education (CBSE) & Anr. v. Aditya Bandhopadhyay and others
 [(2011)
8 SCC 497] stating that:




   "37. xxxxx
   
The Act
 should not be allowed to be misused or abused, to become a tool to
   obstruct the national development and integration, or to destroy the peace,
   tranquility and harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be converted into
   a tool of oppression or intimidation of honest officials striving to do their
   duty. The nation does not want a scenario where 75% of the staff of
   public authorities spends 75% of their time in collecting and furnishing
   information to applicants instead of discharging their regular duties. The
   threat of penalties under the 
RTI Act
 and the pressure of the authorities
   under the 
RTI Act
 should not lead to employees of a public authorities
   prioritising 'information furnishing', at the cost of their normal and regular
   duties."(Emphasis Supplied)......."



Hence, no further intervention of the Commission at this stage is required in the
matter.



                     The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                     Saroj Punhani(सरोज पुनहािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सू
                                                                   सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /




                                         8