[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


G L N Prasad vs Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited ... on 18 August, 2023


                               के   ीयसूचनाआयोग
                      Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग ,मुिनरका
                      Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                        नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067
िशकायत सं या / Complaint No. CIC/MOPNG/C/2022/122453
                           CIC/BPCLD/C/2022/122815
                           CIC/BPCLD/C/2022/122277
                           CIC/BPCLD/C/2022/123071
                           CIC/BPCLD/C/2022/124127
                           CIC/BPCLD/A/2022/127233/C


Shri G L N Prasad                                      ...िशकायतकता /Complainant
                               VERSUS/बनाम

1. PIO, M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas                     ... ितवादीगण /Respondent
Through: Shri A K Sinha - US

2. PIO, BPCL
Through: Smt. Usha Popat - Chief Manager;
Shri Prakash Parate - DGM, Co ordination;
Shri Varun Ramdas - Territory Co ordinator
BPCL Vijayawada Territory

Date of Hearing                       :   17.08.2023
Date of Decision                      :   18.08.2023
Chief Information Commissioner        :   Shri Y. K. Sinha

 Relevant facts emerging from the Complaints/Appellant:
Since both the parties are same, the above mentioned cases are clubbed
together for hearing and disposal.
   Case      RTI Filed  CPIO reply First appeal    FAO     Complaint
    No.         on                                        received on
 122453     14.03.2022 24.03.2022 10.04.2022         -     11.05.2022
 122815     07.04.2022 04.05.2022 07.05.2022         -     13.05.2022
 122277     05.04.2022 02.05.2022 04.05.2022         -     11.05.2022
 123071     08.04.2022 04.05.2022 08.05.2022         -     17.05.2022
 124127     16.04.2022 12.05.2022 16.05.2022         -     23.05.2022
 127233     06.04.2022 23.05.2022 30.05.2022         -     08.06.2022

Information sought
 and background of the case:



                                                                      Page 1 of 16


                          (1) CIC/MOPNG/C/2022/122453

The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 14.03.2022 raising 8 queries,
some of which are as under:-

   Reference FAA/ Deputy Secretary, MoPNG Order no. 000043/Appeals-
   OMC dt, 3rd Mar, 2022

     1. Please provide certified copy of Single correct complete and relevant
        reply from Dec. 2007 till date either BPCL or by Ministry on subject.

        The allegation is on ministry presenting fundamentally wrong facts in
        replies to the study committee of Members of Parliament, as learned
        and honorable FAA in his quasi judicial authority has replied that
        both Ministry and BPCL has replied 150 applications from last 10
        years.

     2. Please provide the copy of such record basing on which FAA has
        judged in his quasi judicial authority of that seeking information on
        the allegation of ministry presenting fundamentally wrong facts in
        replies to the Study committee of Members of Parliament amounts to
        "trying to settle family disputes by trying to involve BPCL and
        ministry with regard to the RO site leased to Burma shell/BPCL.

     3. Please provide as to whether replies were submitted by Ministry or by
        BPCL to Parliament members, and name of the ultimate victim of the
        fraudulent misrepresentations made to Honorable Members of
        Parliament, and the specific authority accountable for such Fraudulent
        misrepresentations.

Etc.

The PIO/Under Secretary, MoPNG vide letter dated 24.03.2023 replied as
under:-



     Point No. (1) to 3) -Copies of the BPCL letter No. BPCL.RTI.AP dated
     26.07.2018 and Ministry's letter o. M-12043(11)/419-OMC-PNG dated
     12th January 2020 are enclosed.



     Point No. (4) to (8) -the requisite information regarding grievances filed
     by the applicant with BPCL and opportunity of personal hearing the
     RTI applications is being transferred under section 6(3) to Bharat
     Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL) for providing the requisite
     information to the applicant directly as the information is lying with
     BPCL.



Dissatisfied with the response received from the CPIO, the Complainant filed a
First Appeal dated 10.4.2022 which was not adjudicated by the FAA.



Aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Complainant approached the Commission with
the instant Complaint.



                                                                           Page 2 of 16


 A written submission dated 04.08.2023 has been received from the Complainant
and duly taken on record.



Another written submission dated 10.08.2023 has been received from the PIO,
MoPNG providing detailed information regarding the background of the dispute
which gave rise to the aforementioned case.



                       (2) CIC/BPCLD/C/2022/122815
The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 07.04.2022 seeking information
on four points:-



    1. Please inform the law on which BPCL can occupy a land for 35 years
       without any registered lease since 1-5-1980 when the law permits
       them for 30 days.

       The laid down Regulation that states the procedure of arranging
       lease rent to dead lesser PV Ramasastry through dealer VM Sastry
       since Oct. 98.

    2. Please inform the law/process for lessee BPCL in attorning some
       other as landowners when the matter is pending for adjudication
       since 09-06-99 and retail out let possession was given first by PV
       Krishnaiah H/o Sugunavati to Burma shell violating "Doctrine of
       Estoppels" (Sec.116 of Indian Evidence Act)

    3. Please inform the reasons for not providing such documents of offer
       of lease to several persons while enjoying possession given by PV
       Krishnaiah, as such attempts are permissible only after giving
       possession to PV Krishnaiah's legal heirs and in case they make
       such claims and possession their rights as lessee stand forfeited.-
       (111(g) TOP Act

    4. Please provide the Copy of recommendations/sanctions for delivering
       the property taken from PV Krishnaiah, later his son PV Ramasastry
       to others as such action is illegal as per 111 g of Property act and
       Sec.116 of IEA/treacherous.



The PIO & Deputy General Manager, BPCLD, Telangana vide letter dated
04.05.2022 replied as under:-



    "The information sought by you under point No. 1 to 4 is denied as you
    are third party and there is no public interest involved at large."



    Your mother in law, Mrs. P. Sugunavati who was neither our Dealer nor
    Lessor and is no more. This information of her demise we gathered
    during CIC hearing 21.04.2022. We were not aware about demise of
    Mrs. P. Sugunavati.



                                                                      Page 3 of 16


     In the changed scenario now when Mrs. P. Sugunavati is no more, you
    and your wife still continue seeking information about a closed Outlet of
    BPCL on which you have a personal family dispute.



    Kindly refer point No. 9 of CIC decision dated 23rd February 2015 of IC
    Sri Sharat Sabharwal. Copy enclosed for your ready reference."



Dissatisfied with the response received from the CPIO, the Complainant filed a
First Appeal dated 07.5.2022 which was not adjudicated by the FAA.



Aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Complainant approached the Commission with
the instant Complaint.



A written submission dated 04.08.2023 has been received from the Complainant
and duly taken on record.



Another written submission dated 08.08.2023 has been received from the PIO,
BPCL reiterating the aforementioned facts and adding as under:

   "It is a fact that Mrs. P. Sugunavati and her daughter Mrs. G. Raja
   Rajeshwari and her Son in Law, Mr. G.L.N. Prasad, have been jointly
   and individually filing large number of RTI applications for the last 12
   years from the same address supplementing and substituting each
   other's application's, on the same subject which have all been answered
   with all the available details and documents".

   We have still NOT received the following documents from Appellant/her
   representatives:

   1. Succession certificate of deceased Mrs. P. Sugunavati mentioning Mrs.
   G. Raja Rajeswari as one of Legal Heirs of Mrs. P. Sugunavati.

   2. Succession certificate of the Lessor of the Retail Outlet land mentioning
   Mrs. P. Sugunavati as one of her Legal Heirs of the Lessor of the Retail
   Outlet land.

   3. Authority letter of Mrs. P. Sugunavati & Mrs. G. Raja Rajeswari
   authorizing Mr. G.LN. Prasad to attend the CIC hearing of 21.04.2022.

   Hence in the absence of receipt of the above documents from the
   representatives of Mrs. P. Sugunavati, we are unable to provide any
   information,
   For the reasons stated above, it is prayed that the second appeal may be
   dismissed with strictures and cost. Also request to accord a personal
   hearing to us at the earliest so that we can put forward our submission
   and close this case once for all.

   We also would like to inform you that Mr. Varun T Ramdas, Territory
   coordinator, BPCL Vijayawada Territory would be attending the said
   hearing scheduled on 17.08.2023 at 12:40 PM. in place of me, as I am
   attending outstation official meeting on 17.08.2023.



                                                                        Page 4 of 16


    Mr. Varun T Ramdas is fully aware about the matter and he would be
   attending with full facts and documents, as this matter pertains to
   Vijayawada BPCL Retail Territory.



                       (3) CIC/BPCLD/C/2022/122277
The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 05.04.2022 seeking following
information:-



    Please provide such certified copy of a public record of Burma shell as
    stated to USMPNG/Loksabha, CIC CVC but not provided before courts in
    ASMP 2497/2014 when summoned.

    1. The records that state existence of promissory note dt. 23.10.1964 Rs.

    52,000/- executed by PV Ramasastry together with VV Ramasastry and
    his undivided sons in favour of Burma shell as stated by BPCL, when
    there was never any such promissory note at all (This query No. v of
    MPNG letter).



    2. The records that state that VV Ramasastry has paid Rs. 22,000/-
    dues of M/s PV Krishnaiah & Co to Burma shell & others as per letter of
    CPIO dt.14.03.2008 (Query No. vi)

The PIO/Deputy General Manager-BNP(Retail), BPCL, Andhra Pradesh &
Telangana vide letter dated 02.05.2022 replied as under:-



  " The information sought by you under point No. 1and 2 is denied as you
  are third party and there is no public interest involved at large.



   Your mother in law, Mrs. P. Sugunavati who was neither our Dealer nor
   Lessor and is no more. This information of her demise we gathered
   during CIC hearing 21.04.2022. We were not aware about demise of Mrs.
   P. Sugunavati.



   In the changed scenario now when Mrs. P. Sugunavati is no more, you
   and your wife still continue seeking information about a closed Outlet of
   BPCL on which you have a personal family dispute.



   Kindly refer point No. 9 of CIC decision dated 23rd February 2015 of IC
   Sri Sharat Sabharwal. Copy enclosed for your ready reference."



Dissatisfied with the response received from the CPIO, the Complainant filed a
First Appeal dated 04.5.2022 which was not adjudicated by the FAA.



Aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Complainant approached the Commission with
the instant Aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Complainant approached the
Commission with the instant Complaint.



                                                                        Page 5 of 16


 A written submission dated 08.08.2023 has been received from the PIO, BPCL
reiterating the aforementioned facts in the line of the submissions filed in the
abovementioned cases.



A written submission dated 10.08.2023 has been received from the Complainant
and duly taken on record.



                        (4) CIC/BPCLD/C/2022/123071
The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 08.04.2022 seeking the following
information:-



   Please provide single public record basing on which BPCL has been stating
   for 14 years that VV Sastry has repaid Rs. 52,000/- to Burma shell and
   others (14-03-2008 OS 103/08 exhibit) on behalf of PV Ramasastry.



   When The Truth Well Known to BPCL was their own document 26-10-1964
   confirmed that PV Ramasastry was never ultimately indebted to Burma
   shell at all and BPCL has not provided single piece of document as counter
   for all the fraudulent averments to any applicant and Members of
   Parliament that VV Sastry has paid amounts to Burma shell for and on
   behalf of PV Ramasastry.



The PIO/Deputy General Manager-BNP (Retail), BPCL, Andhra Pradesh &
Telangana vide letter dated 04.05.2022 replied as under:-



   " The information sought by you is denied as you are third party and there
   is no public interest involved at large.



   Your mother in law, Mrs. P. Sugunavati who was neither our Dealer nor
   Lessor and is no more. This information of her demise we gathered during
   CIC hearing 21.04.2022. We were not aware about demise of Mrs. P.
   Sugunavati.



   In the changed scenario now when Mrs. P. Sugunavati is no more, you and
   your wife still continue seeking information about a closed Outlet of BPCL
   on which you have a personal family dispute.



   Kindly refer point No. 9 of CIC decision dated 23rd February 2015 of IC Sri
   Sharat Sabharwal. Copy enclosed for your ready reference."



Dissatisfied with the response received from the CPIO, the Complainant filed a
First Appeal dated 08.05.2022 which was not adjudicated by the FAA.



                                                                        Page 6 of 16


 Aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Complainant approached the Commission with
the instant Complaint.



A written submission dated 08.08.2023 has been received from the PIO, BPCL
reiterating the aforementioned facts.



A written submission dated 04.08.2023 has been received from the Complainant
and duly taken on record.



                           (5) CIC/BPCLD/C/2022/124127

The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 16.04.2022 seeking the following
information:-



1. Please provide such certified copy of a public record based on which BPCL has
   been stating since 14-03-2008 to this date that stated VV Sastry has repaid
   even a single rupee to Burmashell (BPCL statement is that he has repaid Rs.

   52,000) for and on behalf of PV Krishnaiah & CO dealership firm when their
   records dt. 26.10.1964 never disclosed single paisa due and confirmed huge
   refunds to the Regd firm.

2. Please provide an action taken on Mr. Pentakota Jagnnatha Rao who has in the
   discharge of his functions made fraudulent misrepresentations to the
   investigating officer CI of police Nagarampalem, as every sentence in such
   statement was false and fraudulent and a complaint was made to CVO, BPCL,
   Territory Manager, Vijaywada, had retail south on 02.08.2018.



Etc.

The PIO/Deputy General Manager-BNP(Retail), BPCL, Andhra Pradesh &
Telangana vide letter dated 12.05.2022 replied as under:-



       " The information sought by you under point No. 1 to 4 is denied as you
       are third party and there is no public interest involved at large.



   Your mother in law, Mrs. P. Sugunavati who was neither our Dealer nor
   Lessor and is no more. This information of her demise we gathered
   during CIC hearing 21.04.2022. We were not aware about demise of Mrs.
   P. Sugunvati.



   In the changed scenario now when Mrs. P. Sugunavati is no more, you
   and your wife still continue seeking information about a closed Outlet of
   BPCL on which you have a personal family dispute.



   Kindly refer point No. 9 of CIC decision dated 23rd February 2015 of IC
   Sri Sharat Sabharwal. Copy enclosed for your ready reference."



                                                                          Page 7 of 16


 Dissatisfied with the response received from the CPIO, the Complainant filed a
First Appeal dated 16.5.2022 which was not adjudicated by the FAA.



Aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Complainant approached the Commission with
the instant Complaint.



Facts emerging in Course of Hearing:

A written submission dated 04.08.2023 has been received from the Complainant
and duly taken on record.



Hearing was scheduled through virtual means after giving prior notice to both
the parties. The relevant parties were present for hearing and the Complainant
reiterated his contentions as submitted vide his written notes and stated that
information has been wrongly denied to him on the ground that it refers to
personal information of third party. He contended that the information sought
by him relates to a piece of land which was owned by his deceased father-in-law
and mother-in-law, and he as the son-in-law cannot be treated as a third party.
He has also raised objection on the fact that procedure under 
Section 11
 of the
RTI Act was not followed by the Respondent while denying the information.



The Respondent submitted that Mrs. P. Sugunavati and her daughter Mrs. G.
Raja Rajeshwari and her Son in Law, Mr. G.L.N. Prasad, have been jointly and
individually filing large number of RTI applications for the last 12 years from the
same address supplementing and substituting each other's application's, on the
same subject which have all been answered with all the available details and
documents. The Complainant and his family members have filed numerous RTI
applications since 2008 seeking information about the retail outlet site leased to
the erstwhile Burma Shell. It is the Respondent's contention that all the
information available on record with the public authority as defined under

Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act has been furnished in response to the numerous RTI
cases filed by the Complainant and his family members. The Respondent has
summarised the more than 200 letters and replies sent so far by BPCL to the
various RTI applications filed by late Mrs. P. Sugunavati (Mother in law of Mr.
G.L.N. Prasad, Appellant) and Mrs. G Raja Rajeshwari (wife of Mr. G.L.N. Prasad
Appellant).



Decision
Perusal of records of the aforementioned cases reveals that among the multiple
cases filed by him, the two recent cases heard by a co ordinate Bench are most
noteworthy.      While      deciding     the    second      appeal     number

CIC/BPCLD/A/2020/121930 [Mrs. P Sugunavati vs. CPIO, BPCL
] by order dated
21.04.2022, it was held as under:




                                                                         Page 8 of 16


     "..8. The Commission, after hearing the submissions of both the parties
    and after perusal of records, observes that the appellant has sought
    information regarding certified copies of the written statement filed by
    BPCL in eviction suit and other queries related thereto. The Commission
    observes that the representative of appellant's legal heir has contended
    that Mrs. G Rajarajeshwari, being the legal heir of the deceased
    appellant, is entitled to receive the information sought in the instant RTI
    Application. The then CPIO in its reply dated 01.06.2020 submitted that
    they have furnished complete information to the appellant as per the
    documents available on record. But, while making oral submissions
    during the hearing, the present CPIO has taken different stand by
    stating that the information sought cannot be provided being related to
    third party personal information and the disclosure of such information
    is exempted under 
section 8 (1) (j)
 of the RTI Act, 2005......
    ..........

    10. Therefore, in view of the above observations and in the interest of
    justice, the Commission advises the representative of the appellant's
    legal heir to furnish the proof of Mrs. G Rajarajeshwari being a legal
    heir of deceased appellant. He is also directed to furnish a copy of
    authorization letter from Mrs. G Rajarajeshwari in his favour in order to
    enable him to receive the information on her behalf from respondent
    public authority..."



On a subsequent occasion, the same Bench while deciding another second
appeal number CIC/BPCLD/A/2021/100773 vide order dated 10.08.2022, held
as under:

      7. The Commission, after hearing the submissions of both the parties
      and after perusal of records, observes that the appellant has sought
      information regarding her property which is taken on lease by BPCL
      and other queries related thereto. Shri G.L.N. Prasad, appeared on
      behalf of the appellant has contended that he being the power of
      attorney holder of the appellant, is entitled to receive the requested
      information. In this regard, the Commission is of the opinion that
      firstly, the appellant is expired and as per law, power of attorney
      only subsists if the appellant is alive and not after her death. The
      Commission observes that Shri G.L.N. Prasad further referred a case
      bearing file no. CIC/BPCL/A/2020/121930 wherein the Commission
      had directed the respondent to provide information to him, hence in
      lieu of the same, he pressed on to provide him the requested
      information in the present case also. The Commission has gone
      through the contents of the said case and found that Shri G.L.N.
      Prasad had claimed to be authorized by Mrs. G. Rajarajeshwari
      (deceased appellant's legal heir) to receive such information on her
      behalf. Hence, the Commission had directed the respondent to
      provide the information to Shri G.L.N. Prasad on receipt of proof of
      Mrs. G. Rajarajeshwari being a legal heir of deceased appellant





                                                                           Page 9 of 16

        along with copy of authorization letter from Mrs. G. Rajarajeshwari in
       favor of Shri G.L.N. Prasad in the said case. But, in the present case,
       neither Shri G.L.N. Prasad is authorized to receive the requested
       information nor he has pressed to furnish any authority letter to
       receive the information, hence, the information as sought in the
       present matter cannot be provided to him.

     8. In light of the above observations, the Commission is of the opinion that
      Shri G.L.N. Prasad only contested the power of attorney which ceased
      to be invalid as on the death of the appellant as such power of
      attorney only attains the validity till the life of the person not after his/
      her death. Hence, no further intervention of the Commission is required
      in the matter.."



In the light of the above position, it is pertinent to note the written submission
sent by the Respondent which indicates that despite the specific observations
and directions of the Commission vide the aforementioned order, the factual
position reported by the Respondent in the aforementioned complaints is as
stated hereunder:

    "We have still NOT received the following documents from Appellant/her
    representatives:

    1. Succession certificate of deceased Mrs. P. Sugunavati mentioning Mrs.
    G. Raja Rajeswari as one of Legal Heirs of Mrs. P. Sugunavati.

    2. Succession certificate of the Lessor of the Retail Outlet land mentioning
    Mrs. P. Sugunavati as one of her Legal Heirs of the Lessor of the Retail
    Outlet land.

    3. Authority letter of Mrs. P. Sugunavati & Mrs. G. Raja Rajeswari
    authorizing Mr. G.LN. Prasad to attend the CIC hearing of 21.04.2022.

    Hence in the absence of receipt of the above documents from the
    representatives of Mrs. P. Sugunavati, we are unable to provide any
    information,

In fact the denial of information citing that information is related to third party
is in keeping with the provisions of law and does not suffer from any          legal
infirmity. Since the aforementioned cases are complaints the only issue to be
determined is whether there has been any deliberate or wilful denial of
information in these cases. Considering the facts of the above cases, the
Commission is of the opinion that the aforementioned cases do not merit action
under 
Section 18
 of the RTI Act, since there is no deliberate or malafide denial
or concealment of information by the Respondent.



Hence the complaints are disposed off as such.



                      (6) CIC/BPCLD/A/2022/127233/C
The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 06.04.2022 seeking following
information:-



                                                                           Page 10 of 16


    Please provide such certified copies of all such requests from VM Sastry
   as legal heir of VV Sastry the recommendations, the office notes and the
   sanction letters for the lease rent that was paid to Mr. V. Markandeya
   Sastry as legal heir of late Shir VV Sastry upto 2009 @ Rs. 2600/p.a. as
   the applicant suspect a foul play.



The PIO/Deputy General Manager(B&NP (Retail) BPCL, Andhra Pradesh
&Telangana vide letter dated 23.05.2022 replied as under:-



   " The information sought by you under point No. 1 is denied as you are
   third party and there is no public interest involved at large.



   Your mother in law, Mrs. P. Sugunavati who was neither our Dealer nor
   Lessor and is no more. This information of her demise we gathered during
   CIC hearing 21.04.2022. We were not aware about demise of Mrs. P.
   Sugunvati.



   In the changed scenario now when Mrs. P. Sugunavati is no more, you
   and your wife still continue seeking information about a closed Outlet of
   BPCL on which you have a personal family dispute.



   Kindly refer point No. 9 of CIC decision dated 23rd February 2015 of IC Sri
   Sharat Sabharwal. Copy enclosed for your ready reference."



Dissatisfied with the response received from the CPIO, the Complainant filed a
First Appeal dated 30.05.2022 which was not adjudicated by the FAA.



Aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Complainant approached the Commission with
the instant Complaint.



Facts emerging in Course of Hearing:

Hearing was scheduled through virtual means after giving prior notice to both
the parties. The relevant parties attended the hearing through video conference
and reiterated their respective contentions, as noted hereinabove.



Decision:

Perusal of the facts of the appeal reveals that the information sought by the
Appellant relates to a third party and is personal in nature; disclosure whereof is
barred under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act. The Appellant has not produced any
legally admissible document to claim that he is the rightful legal heir of the
deceased third party to access the information. Hence no legal infirmity is found
in the reply sent by the PIO and thus no intervention is warranted in this case.



The appeal is thus disposed off with no further direction.



                                                                        Page 11 of 16


 Before concluding the decision, considering the numerous cases filed by the
Applicant herein and his family members, the Commission wishes to refer to
some decisions of this Commission, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi and the
Hon'ble Supreme Court whereby such misuse of the 
RTI Act
 has been
discouraged from time to time. Some of the important precedents are as under:



     i. This Commission has in its decision no. CIC/YA/A/2014/001071,
     001123,001210 while disposing of a batch of fifteen matters of one Sh. M
     Danasegar dated 30.06.2015 held as follows:



          "......The Commission finds this case to be a classic instance of
          blatant misuse of 
RTI Act
 by the appellant, who is a disgruntled
          employee of the same organisation, through relentlessly filing of a
          series of RTI applications to harass officials of a public authority.
          The information sought in most of his RTI applications has no
          public interest at all and veers around the disciplinaryproceedings
          initiated against him. In the process of seeking the same, the
          appellant has resorted to reckless data mining on a humongous
          scale. Still, information has been provided by the respondent
          authorities as per record on some points and the rest denied for
          the reason that it is either voluminous or not available or relates to
          clarification/interpretation. The appellant, motivated by personal
          interest, has clearly sought such information with the vengeful
          motive to harass the officers through a flurry of RTI applications.
          
The RTI Act
 cannot be allowed to be misused or abused and to
          become a tool of oppression or for intimidation of officials striving
          to do their duty. ..."



                                                           Emphasis supplied



     ii. The Apex Court's observation regarding vexatious and frivolous
     petitions in Advocate General, Bihar vs. M.P. Khair Industries(AIR 1980 SC

     946) "....filing of frivolous and vexatious petitions as abuse of the RTI
     process. Some of such abuses specifically mentioned by the Apex Court
     include initiating or carrying on proceedings which are wanting in bona-

     fides or which are frivolous, vexatious or oppressive. The Apex Court also
     observed that in such cases the Court has extensive alternative powers to
     prevent an abuse of its process by striking out or staying proceedings or by
     prohibiting taking up further proceedings. ...."



                                                                         Page 12 of 16


 
iii. The Apex Court had discussed the issue in great detail in the case of

Ashok Kumar Pandey vs. The State of West Bengal
, (AIR 2003 SC 280 Para


11), where J.Pasayat had held:



   ".........It is depressing to note that on account of such trumpery
   proceedings initiated before the Courts, innumerable days are
   wasted, which time otherwise could have been spent for the
   disposal of cases of the genuine litigants. Though we spare no
   efforts in fostering and developing the laudable concept of PIL and
   extending our long arm of sympathy to the poor, the ignorant, the
   oppressed and the needy whose fundamental rights are infringed
   and violated and whose grievances go unnoticed, unrepresented
   and unheard; yet we cannot avoid but expressing our opinion that
   while genuine litigants with legitimate grievances relating to civil
   matters involving properties worth hundreds of millions of rupees
   and criminal cases in which persons sentenced to death facing
   gallows under untold agony and persons sentenced to life
   imprisonment and kept in incarceration for long years, persons
   suffering from undue delay in service matters, Government or
   private, persons awaiting the disposal of case... ... ... etc. etc. are
   all standing in a long serpentine queue for years with the fond hope
   of getting into the Courts and having their grievances redressed, the
   busybodies, meddlesome interlopers, wayfarers or officious
   interveners having absolutely no public interest except for personal
   gain or private profit either of themselves or as proxy of others or for
   any other extraneous motivation or for glare of publicity break the
   queue muffing their faces by wearing the mask of public interest
   litigation and get into the Courts by filing vexatious and frivolous
   petitions and thus criminally waste the valuable time of the Courts,
   as a result of which the queue standing outside the doors of the
   Courts never moves, which piquant situation creates frustration in
   the minds of the genuine litigants and resultantly they lose faith in
   the administration of our judicial system..........."



                                                      Emphasis supplied


iv. The Hon'ble High Court of Madras in the case of Public Information
Officer, Registrar (Administration) Vs B Bharathi [WP No. 26781/2013 dated
17.09.2014] has also given its opinion about such vexatious litigation
crippling the public authorities and held as follows:



    "...The action of the second respondent in sending numerous
    complaints and representations and then following the same with
    the RTI applications; that it cannot be the way to redress his
    grievance; that he cannot overload a public authority and divert its
    resources disproportionately while seeking information and that





                                                                    Page 13 of 16

          the dispensation of information should not occupy the majority of
         time and resource of any public authority, as it would be against
         the larger public interest....."



 
Emphasis supplied


     v. The Hon'ble Delhi High Court while deciding the case of 
Shail Sahni vs.
     Sanjeev Kumar &Ors. [W.P. (C
) 845/2014] has observed that:




         "........Consequently, this Court deems it appropriate to refuse toex
         ercise its writ jurisdiction. Accordingly, present petition is
         dismissed. This Court is also of the view that misuse of the 
RTI
         Act
 has to be appropriately dealt with, otherwise the public would
         lose faith and confidence in this "sunshine Act". A beneficial
         Statute, when made a tool for mischief and abuse must be
         checked in accordance with law. ...................."

                                                          Emphasis supplied


     vi. In the matter of Rajni Maindiratta- Vs Directorate of Education (North
     West-B) [W.P.(C) No. 7911/2015] the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi, vide its
     order dated 08.10.2015 has held that:

         "8. .....Though undoubtedly, the reason for seeking the information
         is not required to be disclosed but when it is found that the
         process of the law is being abused, the same become relevant.
         Neither the authorities created under the 
RTI Act
 nor the Courts
         are helpless if witness the provisions of law being abused and
         owe a duty to immediately put a stop thereto..."



The aforesaid dicta essentially prove that the misuse of 
RTI Act
 is a well
recognized problem and citizens such as the Appellant should take note that
their right to information is not absolute.



 
vii. The Apex Court 
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India Vs.
     Shaunak H. Satya and Ors
, [A.I.R 2011 SC 3336] has categorically
     cautioned thus:


            "...
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available
            and existing. This is clear from a combined reading of 
Section 3

            and the definitions of 'information' and 'right to information' under
            Clauses (f) and (j) of 
Section 2
 of the Act. If a public authority has
            any information in the form of data or analysed data, or
            abstracts, or statistics, an applicant may access such
            information, subject to the exemptions in 
Section 8
 of the Act. But
            where the information sought is not a part of the record of a





                                                                          Page 14 of 16

       public authority, and where such information is not required to be
      maintained under any law or the rules or regulations of the public
      authority, the Act does not cast an obligation upon the public
      authority, to collect or collate such non-available information and
      then furnish it to an applicant. The right to information is a
      fundamental right as enshrined in 
Article 19
 of the Constitution of
      India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has declared in a plethora of
      cases that the most important value for the functioning of a
      healthy and well-informed democracy is transparency. However
      it is necessary to make a distinction in regard to information
      intended to bring transparency, to improve accountability and to
      reduce corruption, falling under 
Section 4(1)(b)
 and (c) and other
      information which may not have a bearing on accountability or
      reducing corruption. The competent authorities under the 
RTI Act

      will have to maintain a proper balance so that while achieving
      transparency, the demand for information does not reach
      unmanageable proportions affecting other public interests, which
      include efficient operation of public authorities and government,
      preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information and
      optimum use.."

                                                      Emphasis supplied
viii. 
In the other landmark judgement in the case of 
Central Board of
Secondary Education &Anr. Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors.
, the Apex
Court held as follows:




     "...
The Act
 seeks to bring about a balance between two
     conflicting interests, as harmony between them is essential for
     preserving democracy. One is to bring about transparency and
     accountability by providing access to information under the
     control of public authorities. The other is to ensure that the
     revelation of information, in actual practice, does not conflict with
     other public interests which include efficient operation of the
     governments, optimum use of limited fiscal resources and
     preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information. The
     preamble to the Act specifically states that the object of the Act is
     to harmonise these two conflicting interest. ...................................

     37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information and
     right to information are intended to be formidable tools in the
     hands of responsible citizens to fight corruption and to bring in
     transparency           and         accountability.............................
     Indiscriminate and impractical demands or directions under 
RTI
     Act
 for disclosure of all and sundry information (unrelated to
     transparency and accountability in the functioning of public
     authorities and eradication of corruption) would be counter-
     productive as it will adversely affect the efficiency of the





                                                                             Page 15 of 16

               administration and result in the executive getting bogged down
              with the non-productive work of collecting and furnishing
              information. 
The Act
 should not be allowed to be misused or
              abused, to become a tool to obstruct the national development
              and integration, or to destroy the peace, tranquility and harmony
              among its citizens. Nor should it be converted into a tool of
              oppression or intimidation of honest officials striving to do their
              duty. The nation does not want a scenario where 75% of the staff
              of public authorities spends 75% of their time in collecting and
              furnishing information to applicants instead of discharging their
              regular duties..."

                                                             Emphasis supplied
 In the light of the above decisions, the Applicant herein is advised to strictly
 refrain in future from filing applications repeatedly seeking information on the
 same subject matter, under the 
RTI Act
 unless he is able to submit proof of his
 legal right as heir to the deceased third party.



 The aforementioned cases are disposed off accordingly.



                                                                       वाई. के . िस हा)
                                                        Y. K. Sinha (वाई.

                                   Chief Information Commissioner (मु य सूचना आयु )

Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स ािपत ित)

S. K. Chitkara (एस. के. िचटकारा)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26186535





                                                                           Page 16 of 16