[Cites 
31
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Naresh Kadyan vs Central Zoo Authority, New Delhi on 20 January, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               के ीय सूचना आयोग
                       Central Information Commission
                            बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                         नई िद ली, New Delhi - 110067

Files No.: CIC/CZAUR/C/2022/604904 +
           CIC/CZAUR/C/2022/605379 +
           CIC/CZAUR/C/2022/605385 +
           CIC/CZAUR/C/2022/607976

Naresh Kadyan                                     ....िशकायतकता  /Complainant


                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम
CPIO,
Central Zoo Authority,
RTI Cell, B-1 Wing,6th Floor, Pt,
Deendayal Antyodaya Bhawan,
CGO Complex, New DElhi-110003.                           .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                     :    18/01/2023
Date of Decision                    :    18/01/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :               Saroj Punhani

Note- The abovementioned Complaints have been clubbed together for
decision as these are based on similar RTI Applications.

Relevant facts emerging from Complaint (s):

RTI application (s) filed on        : 07-11-2021, 11-11-2021, 12-11-2021 &
                                      10-10-2021
CPIO replied on                     : 06-12-2021, 10-12-2021, 10-12-2021 &
                                      09-11-2021
First appeal (s) filed on           : 07-12-2021, 11-12-2021, 10-11-2021
First Appellate Authority order (s) : 21-01-2022 & 09-12-2021.
2nd Appeal/Complaint (s) dated      : NIL
                           CIC/CZAUR/C/2022/604904
Information sought
:

The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 07.11.2021 seeking the
following information:



                                          xxx
Supply me the copies of authority enjoyed by office bearers and members, as
stated above and along with the following and concerned resolutions with
minutes, concerned file notings:

1. Complete list - details of the establishments, recognized by the CZA, under
section 38-H of the WP Act, 1972, registered under the 
Society Registration Act,
1860
.

2. Complete list, details, point wise, strict compliance of terms and conditions of
the CZA Recognition, confirming Master Plan approvals.

3. Details of 5 freedoms of animals, within all Zoos, as per 
section 3
 of PCA Act,
1960, read with orders passed by Supreme Court of India, SLP (C) No.11686 of
2007 with Uttrakhand High Court.

4.A). Tenure of these office bearers with Rules and Regulations of the G.B. Pant
High Altitude Zoo Management Society.

B). Consequent upon the nominations made vide paragraph one above, the
composition of the reconstituted G.B. Pant High Altitude Zoo Management
Society, shall be as under:

C). Complete list with terms and conditions of the all persons, employed with
their designation and pay scales, retire benefits as well.
D). Complete details about removal of Bharat Ratna, before G.B. Pant High
Altitude Zoo Management Society, with all communications, letters, orders and
circulars, related to Bharat Ratna.

E). Point wise, strict compliance, of the following sections:

Societies Registration Act, 1860
: 
An Act
 for the Registration of Literary,
Scientific and Charitable Societies. Preamble: Whereas it is expedient that
provision should be made for improving the legal condition of societies
established for the promotion of literature, science, or the fine arts, or for the
diffusion of useful knowledge, the diffusion of political education or for
charitable purposes: 
Section 4
: 5: 6: 12: 13, 14, 15, 16 and 20. Copy attached.



The CPIO furnished a pointwise reply to the Complainant on 06.12.2021 stating
as under -

Sl.No.   Information Sought                      Information Provided
1        Complete list -      details   of   the The requested information is not
      establishments, recognized by the CZA,         collated by this public authority.

     under section 38-H of the WP Act, 1972,        However, a list of all the zoos
     registered under the Society Registration      recognized     by    this   public
     Act, 1860.                                     authority is readily available ion
2    Complete list, details, point wise, strict     the website of this public
     compliance of terms and conditions of          authority under the head 'Public
     the CZA Recognition, confirming Master         Information' and 'Information
     Plan approvals.                                about zoos'.

3    Details of 5 freedoms of animals, within       The request information is vague
     all Zoos, as per 
section 3
 of PCA Act,         and ambiguous and requires the
     1960, read with orders passed by               CPIO to draw inference which is
     Supreme Court of India, SLP (C)                beyond the scope of the Right to
     No.11686 of 2007 with Uttarakhand              Information Act, 2005.
     High Court.

4A   Tenure of these office bearers with Rules
     and Regulations of the G.B. Pant High
     Altitude Zoo Management Society.

4B   Consequent upon the nominations made
     vide paragraph one above, the
     composition of the reconstituted G.B.
     Pant High Altitude Zoo Management
     Society, shall be as under:                    The requested information is not
4C   Complete list with terms and conditions        available    with    this public
     of the all persons, employed with their        authority and may be sought
     designation and pay scales, retire             directly from the zoo.
     benefits as well.

4D   Complete details about removal of
     Bharat Ratna, before G.B. Pant High
     Altitude Zoo Management Society, with
     all communications, letters, orders and
     circulars, related to Bharat Ratna.

4E   Point wise, strict compliance, of the          The request information is vague
     following sections:                            and ambiguous and requires the
     
Societies Registration Act, 1860
: 
An Act
       CPIO to draw inference which is
     for the Registration of Literary, Scientific   beyond the scope of the Right to
     and Charitable Societies. Preamble:            
Information Act, 2005
.
     Whereas it is expedient that provision
     should be made for improving the legal
     condition of societies established for the
     promotion of literature, science, or the
     fine arts, or for the diffusion of useful
     knowledge, the diffusion of political
     education or for charitable purposes:

 
Section 4
: 5: 6: 12: 13, 14, 15, 16 and 20.

        Copy attached.



Being dissatisfied, the Complainant filed a First Appeal dated 07.11.2021. FAA's
order dated 21.01.2022, upheld the reply of CPIO.



                            CIC/CZAUR/C/2022/605379

Information sought:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 11.11.2021 seeking the following
information:



1. Supply action taken reports of MOEAF-E-2021-02090 and MOEAF-E-2021
02095 with attachments, with all letters and file notings.

2. Complete list - details of declared trophies of wild animals and birds, with the
Zoos, recognised by the CZA, since beginning till date, onwards 2013.

3. Complete list - details of undeclared trophies of wild animals and birds, with
the Zoos, recognised by the CZA, since beginning till date, onwards 2013.

4. Copies of compliance of all Advisories, issued by AWBI and WCCB.

5. Copies of compliance of Supreme Court order dated 7.5.2014, passed in SLP
(C) No.11686 of 2007, related to 5 freedoms of animals.

Padma Shree Rubin David Natural History Museum, violated 
article 18(1)
 of
Indian Constitution, but reply of Ahmedabad is wrong, ban species are very
much exhibited, besides undeclared trophies of wild animals and birds, all
public servants on pay role of CZA with WCCB and AWBI with NTCA, may awake
up, this is last alarming call from 1st Political Party in India: Animal Welfare
Party for animals, restoring their five freedoms.

1. Issue circulars to declared trophies, to get ownership, disclosing the source of
procurement, as Ahmedabad zoo has many trophies, which needs scanning.

2. Omit Padma awards, prefixed as title, direct Ahmedabad zoo.

3. Get recognition of AWBI, under 
section 22
 of PCA Act, 1960, by all Zoos,
displaying animals in their captivity, but look like wild animals, as per their
shape and size, without wild character, because all are fed manually?

4. Restoration of 5 freedoms of animals, keeping in view, Supreme Court order
dated 7.5.2014, passed in SLP (C) No.11686 of 2007.

5. Omit the definition of goods, from the 
Gujarat Provincial Municipal
Corporations Act, 1949
 
(Bombay Act
 No. LIX of 1949), animals are defined
goods, which is not acceptable to the Animal Welfare Party, Scouts and Guides
 for Animals and Birds www.scoutingindia.in with OIPA: Indian People for
Animals.



The CPIO furnished a pointwise reply to the Complainant on 10.12.2021 stating
as under


Sl. Information Sought           Information Provided
No.
1   Supply action taken of These files do not pertain to Central Zoo
    MOEAF-E-2021-02090 and Authority. Hence, desired information is not
    MOEAF-E-2021- 02095 with available with this public authority.

    attachment, with all letters
    and file nothings.

2   Complete list - details of The information is not collated at the Central
    declared trophies of wild Zoo Authority.
    animals and birds , with the
    zoos, recognised by the
    CZA, since beginning till
    date , onwards,2013.

3   Complete list - details of
    undeclared
    Trophies of wild animals
    and birds, with the zoos,
    recognised by the CZA,
    Since beginning till date,
    onwards 2013.

4   Copies of compliance of all The information sought is not available with
    Advisories issued by AWBI this public authority.
    and WCCB.

5   Copies of complies of supreme   • The desired information is readily
    court order dated 07.05.2014, available on the website of the Central
    passed in SLP(C) No.11686 of Zoo Authority. It details the steps taken
    2007,related to freedoms of by CZA to ensure welfare of captive
    animal.                            animals housed in Indian Zoos-

                                    • https://cza.nic.in/guidelines-for-
                                       managment-of-zoos/en
                                    • https://cza.nic.in/page/en/guidlines-on

                                       -development-and-planning-of-zoos
                                    • https://cza.nic.in/publications/en
6   Padma Shree Rubin David
      Natural                History
     museum,Voileted         
Article
     18(1)

     Of the Indian Constitution .

     but reply of Ahmedabad is
     Wrong ,ban Species are
     very much exhibited ,
     besides           undeclared
     trophies of wild animals
     and birds, all public
     servants on pay role of CZA       No information is Sought.
     with WCCB and AWIB with
     NTCA, may awake up .this
     is last alarming call from 1st
     political party in india:
     animal welfare party for
     animals , restoring their
     five freedoms.
7    Issue circulars to Declared
     trophies, to get ownership,
     Disclosing the source of
     procurement,                 as
     Ahmedabad Zoo has many
     trophies, which needs
     scanning.
8    Omit      Padma      Awards,
     prefixed as title, Direct
     Ahmedabad Zoo.
9    Get        recognition       of
     AWBI.Under 
section 22
 of
     PCA Act,1960,by all zoos,
     Displaying animals, as per
     their shape and size,
     without wild, character ,
     and size , without wild
     character ,because all re
     fed manually.
10   Restoring of 5 freedoms of
     animals, keeping in views
     Supreme court order dated
      07..5.2014, passed in SLP
     (C) No.11686 of 2007.
11   Omit the definition of
     goods, from the 
GUJARAT
     PROVINCIIAL MUNICIPAL
     CORPORATIONS Act,1948
     (Bombay Act
 No. LIX of
     1949), animals are defined
     goods, which is not
     acceptables to the Animals
     Welfare Party, Scouts and
     Guides for animals and
     birds www.scoutingindia.in
     with OIPA: Indian People
     for Animals.


Being dissatisfied, the Complainant filed a First Appeal dated 11.12.2021. FAA's
order dated 21.01.2022, upheld the reply of CPIO.



                         CIC/CZAUR/C/2022/605385

Information sought:

The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 12.11.2021 seeking the
following information:



Animal Welfare Party: AWP, 1st Political Party in India, fighting hard for
animals, restoring their 5 freedoms, but adopted mechanism of Indian.
Government, have contradiction and discriminations, as below, adopting
double standards:

Section 2
 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972:

(1) Animal, includes amphibians, birds, mammals and reptiles and their young,
and also includes, in the cases of birds and reptiles, their eggs.
(2) Animal article, means an article made from any captive animal or wild
animal, other than vermin, and includes an article or object in which the whole
or any part of such animal has been used, and ivory imported into India and an
article made there from.

(5) Captive animal, means any animal, specified in Schedule I, Schedule II,
Schedule III or Schedule IV, which is captured or kept or bred in captivity.
 (18A) Livestock, means farm animals and includes buffaloes, bulls, bullocks,
camels, cows, donkeys, goats, sheep, horses, mules, yaks, pigs, ducks, geese,
poultry and their young but does not include any animal specified in Schedules I
to V.


Section 2
 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988:




(13). GOODS, includes live-stock, and anything (other than equipment ordinarily
used with the vehicle) carried by a vehicle except living persons, but does not
include luggage or personal effects carried in a motor car or in a trailer
attached to a motor car or the personal luggage of passengers travelling in the
vehicle.

(14). Goods carriage, means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use
solely for the carriage of goods, or any motor vehicle not so constructed or
adapted when used for the carriage of goods. Whereas, these goods, as stated
above, have five freedoms, even Supreme Court order, dated 7.5.2014 in SLP (C)
No.11686 of 2007, also confirmed, as per section 54: Chapter 7.1.2 of the
guidelines of OIE, recognizes five internationally recognized freedoms for
animals, such as:

(i) freedom from hunger, thirst and malnutrition.

(ii) freedom from fear and distress.

(iii) freedom from physical and thermal discomfort.

(iv) freedom from pain, injury and disease and

(v) freedom to express normal patterns of Behaviour, read with the 
section 3
 of
the PCA Act, 1960 and 
article 51
 A(g) of Indian Constitution.

Section 2
 of the PCA Act, 1960:

(a) Animal, means any living creature other than a human being.

(c) Captive animal, means any animal (not being a domestic animal) which is in
captivity or confinement, whether permanent or temporary, or which is
subjected to any appliance or contrivance for the purpose of hindering or
preventing its escape from captivity or confinement or which is pinioned or
which is or appears to be maimed.

(d) Domestic animal, means any animal which is tamed or which has been or is
being sufficiently tamed to serve some purpose for the use of man or which,
although it neither has been nor is being nor is intended to be so tamed, is or
has become in fact wholly or partly tamed. Supply concerned file noting,
attached.



The CPIO furnished a pointwise reply to the complainant on 10.12.2021 stating
as under

 Sr.No.   Information Sought                       Information Provided
                                               st

1.       Animal Welfare Party : AWP,1
         Political Party in India, fighting hard
         for animal, restoring their 5
         freedoms ,but adopted mechanism                No information is sought.

         of Indian Government, have
         contradiction and discrimination ,as
         below adopting double standards:

2.       Section 2 of the Wildlife (Protection)
         Act,1972:

         (1).Animal, include amphibians,
         birds, mammals and reptiles and                No Information is sought
         their young, and also includes, in the
         cases of birds and reptiles ,their
         eggs.

         (2).Animal articles , means an article
         ,made from any captive animal or
         wild animals, other than vermin,and
         includes an article or object in which
         the wholw or any part of such                   No information is sought
         animals has been used, and ivory
         imported into india, an article made
         therefrom.

         (5).Captive animals, means any
         animal,specified in schedule III or
         schedule IV, which is captured or               No information is sought
         kept or bred in captivity.



 
18(A) Livestock, means farm
         animals and include buffaloes, bulls,
         bullocks, camels, cows, donkeys,
         goats, sheeps, horses, mules, yaks,
         pigs, ducks, geese, poultry, and their
         young but does not include any No information is sought
         animals specified in schedules I to V.
         
Section 2
 of moter vehicles
         Act,1988:




         (13).GOODS, include live-stocks, and
         anything(other than equipment
         ordinarily used with the vehicle )
         carried by a vehicle except living
         persons,but does not include
 luggage or personal effects carried
in a motor Car or in a trailer
attached to a motor car or in
personal luggage of passengers          No information is sought
travelling in the vehicle.



(14).Goods Carriage, means any
motor vehicles constructed or
adapted for use solely for the
carriage of goods, or any motor
vehicles not so constructed or
adopted when used for the carriage
of goods.

Whereas these goods ,as stated
above, have five freedoms, even
supreme Court order, dated
07.05.2014 in SLP(C) No.11686 of
2007.also confirmed, as per section
54: Chapter 7.1.2 of the guidelines
of       OIE,     recognizes     five
internationally recognized freedoms
for animals, such as

(i)Freedom from hunger, thirst, and
malnutrition.

(ii)freedom from fear and distress.

(iii)freedom from physical and
thermal discomfort.

(iv)Freedom from pain, injury, and
disease.

(v)Freedom to express normal
patterns of behaviours. Read with
the 
section 3
 of the PCA Act,1960
and 
articles 51A(g)
 of Indian
constitution.



Section 2
 of the PCA Act,1960:

(a)Animals, means any living
creature other than a human being.

(c) Captive animals, means any
animals (not being a domestic
animals) which is in captivity or
confinement, whether permanent or
temporary ,or which is subjected to
         any appliance or contrivance for the
        purpose of hindering or preventing
        its escape from preventing its
        escape       from     captivity    or
        confinement or which is pinioned or
        which is or appears to b maimed.

        (d) Domestic animals, means any
        animals which is tamed or which
        has been or is being sufficient
        tamed to serve some purpose for
        the use of man or which , although
        it neither has been nor is being nor
        is intended to be so tamed, is or has
        become in fact wholly or partly
        tamed.

        Supply with concerned file nothing The        requested     information      is
        related to discrimination between unspecific.it required the CPIO to draw
        animals with goods.                    deductions and inferences which is
                                               beyond the scope of the 
RTI Act,2005
.

        List of Complaints, lodged for
        restoration of 5 freedoms, in ZOOs,
        compliance of court order, including
        Zoos of 100 smart cities.

        Goods may not have 5 freedoms, The requested information is not
        supply details activities of AWBI, available with this public authority.
        preventing abuse against goods,
        defined animals.


        Goods , cannot be living creature,
        have pain and sufferings ,supply
        relevant      records     of    NHAI,
        NTCA,WCCB, PE with AWBI and
        CZA.

        Fundamental duties never allowed
        animals as goods ,supply all details ,
        related to animals, beings living
        creatures, treated         as goods
        ,against 
articles 51A(g)
 of Indian
        Constitution.

        Any proposals to omit animals from
        to definitions of goods.



Being dissatisfied, the complainant filed a First Appeal dated 11.12.2021. FAA's
order dated 21.01.2022, upheld the reply of CPIO.

                            CIC/CZAUR/C/2022/607976

Information sought:

The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 10.10.2021 seeking the
following information:



Hanumanvatika operators were many but PFA obtained grant in aid from CZA
without proper, legal land and building, whereas 250 Monkeys left abandoned
to die with Rehabilitation, supply me details, mechanism, process to release
these rescued 250 Monkeys, along with

1. Community Policing as man of many achievements and distinctions: Voice
for voiceless: Fighter by spirit: Jat by birth: Philanthropist by profession: Activist
by mission: Humanitarian by choice, Gandhian by vision and action, being
habitual khadi wearers and scout worrier, speaking truth as passion - Naresh
Kadyan, wants to know with all concerned file notings with copies of letters and
MoU, Agreements, deeds etc, executed, by Hanumanvatika operators in
Haryana.

2. Complete details - list of Monkeys accepted by Hanumanvatika for
treatment, care and shelter

3. Complete details - list of Establishments, their experiment Monkeys accepted
by Hanumanvatika for treatment, care and shelter

4. Animal Birth Control Scheme was not adopted by Hanumanvatika, all 250
Monkeys were not recued besides supply the details about baby Monkeys born
in captivity of Hanumanvatika with present status of these Monkeys, as per
report they are scattered unscientifically here and there, without any scheme
and policy, vision as well.

5. Hanumanvatika operator PFA of Menka Ghandhi lost recognition in 2013,
complete details, list of Establishments, clarifying the release process with
recognised places

6. Wildlife sos charged 10% penalty but PFA of Menka Ghandhi was charged
7.6%, complete details about double standards, complete details about
mechanism, system develops to recovery efforts made, communicated, supply
all copies.



The CPIO furnished a pointwise reply to the complainant on 08.11.2021 stating
as under -



Sl. No.   Information Sought           Information Provided
1         Community Policing as man of It is informed that the requested
     many         achievements        and    information does not come within
    distinctions: Voice for voiceless:      the purview of this public authority.
    Fighter by spirit: Jat by birth:

    Philanthropist     by     profession:

    Activist by mission: Humanitarian
    by choice, Gandhian by vision and
    action, being habitual khadi
    wearers and scout worrier,
    speaking truth as passion - Naresh
    Kadyan, wants to know with all
    concerned file notings with copies
    of letters and MoU, Agreements,
    deeds      etc,     executed,      by
    Hanumanvatika        operators     in
    Haryana
2   Complete details - list of Monkeys      The information sought is not
    accepted by Hanumanvatika for           available with this public authority.
    treatment, care and shelter
3   Complete details - list of
    Establishments, their experiment
    Monkeys           accepted         by
    Hanumanvatika for treatment,
    care and shelter
4   Animal Birth Control Scheme was
    not adopted by Hanumanvatika, all
    250 Monkeys were not recued
    besides supply the details about        The information sought is not
    baby Monkeys born in captivity of       available with this public authority.
    Hanumanvatika        with    present
    status of these Monkeys, as per
    report     they     are    scattered
    unscientifically here and there,
    without any scheme and policy,
    vision as well.

5   Hanumanvatika operator PFA of
    Menka Ghandhy lost recognition in
    2013, complete details, list of
    Establishments, clarifying        the
    release process with recognised
    places
6   Wildlife sos charged 10% penalty        The requested information is
    but PFA of Menka Ghandhy was            vague/unspecific and the applicant is
    charged 7.6%, complete details          requested to clearly specify the
             about double standards, complete information so that he same can be
            details about mechanism, system furnished.
            develops to recovery efforts made,
            communicated, supply all copies

Being dissatisfied, the complainant filed a First Appeal dated 10.11.2021. FAA's
order dated 09.12.2021, upheld the reply of CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Complainant approached the
Commission with the instant Complaint.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Complainant: Not present.

Respondent: R. S. Rawat, Finance Officer & CPIO along with Surya Gupta, Law
Officer present through intra-video conference.



The Commission remarked at the outset that the Complainant telephonically
informed the Registry of this bench that he will not be able to participate in
the hearing owing to personal exigencies and prayed the Commission that his
cases may be decided on merit.



The CPIO relied on his latest written submissions filed prior to hearing and at
the outset apprised the Commission that the Complainant is a habitual RTI
Applicant who has filed multiple RTI Applications seeking similar kind of vague
information and the contents of his RTI Applications are complicated/ lengthy
to the extent of being very incoherent and non-decipherable and further to
even comprehend the exact meaning of his queries , in fact, entails substantial
time of the CPIO' and also causes harassment . Nonetheless, he in a bonafide
conduct provided point wise replies along with relevant available information
in response to each RTI Application earlier and now vide latest written
submission. He added that even otherwise, the list of relevant
rules/regulations/guidelines and other ancillary information pertaining to
Central Zoo Authority are in the public domain and which can be easily
accessed from their website. This, factual position has already been intimated
to the Complainant.



Decision:

 At the outset, the Commission observes from a perusal of records that a
bunch of Complaints (s)/ Appeals bearing File no. CIC/MORTH/A/2020/685460
& others of the same Complainant against same/another public authority have
already been heard and disposed of by this bench on 07.11.2022 and
27.12.2022. In this regard, it is also worth noting that the instant Complaints
listed for today's hearing have been heard together along with other 5 mattes
of the Complainant simultaneously and the Complainant has filed numerous
RTI Applications for the same nature of information sought by merely
expanding the nature of information sought in each of his RTI Applications
merely to pressurize the public authority into acceding to his request for
similar nature of information. It appears that the Complainant has grossly
misconceived the idea of exercising his Right to Information as being absolute
and unconditional. It is rather unfortunate that even the best of intentions
have to not only stand the test of procedural requirements and fetters 
laid
down in
 the 
RTI Act
 but also stand the test of practicality, a notion well
recognised by superior Courts through various judgments such as the Hon'ble
Supreme Court's observation in Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE)
& anr. v. Aditya Bandhopadhyay and others [(2011) 8 SCC 497] stating that:



            "37. The right to information is a cherished right. Information
     and right to information are intended to be formidable tools in the
     hands of responsible citizens to fight corruption and to bring in
     transparency and accountability. The provisions of 
RTI Act
 should be
     enforced strictly and all efforts should be made to bring to light the
     necessary information under clause (b) of 
section 4(1)
 of the Act which
     relates to securing transparency and accountability in the working of
     public authorities and in discouraging corruption. But in regard to
     other information,(that is information other than those enumerated
     in 
section 4(1)(b)
 and (c) of the Act), equal importance and emphasis
     are given to other public interests (like confidentiality of sensitive
     information, fidelity and fiduciary relationships, efficient operation of
     governments, etc.). Indiscriminate and impractical demands or
     directions under 
RTI Act
 for disclosure of all and sundry information
     (unrelated to transparency and accountability in the functioning of
     public authorities and eradication of corruption) would be counter-

     productive as it will adversely affect the efficiency of the
     administration and result in the executive getting bogged down with
     the non- productive work of collecting and furnishing information. 
The
     Act
 should not be allowed to be misused or abused, to become a tool
       to obstruct the national development and integration, or to destroy
      the peace, tranquility and harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be
      converted into a tool of oppression or intimidation of honest officials
      striving to do their duty. The nation does not want a scenario where
      75% of the staff of public authorities spends 75% of their time in
      collecting and furnishing information to applicants instead of
      discharging their regular duties. The threat of penalties under the 
RTI
      Act
 and the pressure of the authorities under the 
RTI Act
 should not
      lead to employees of a public authorities prioritising 'information
      furnishing', at the cost of their normal and regular duties." (Emphasis
      Supplied)

In view of the foregoing, the Complainant is advised to make judicious use
of his right to information in future."
Notwithstanding the aforesaid, the Commission after scrutinizing the contents
of RTI Application(s) in question is of the considered view that the queries
raised by the Complainant are vague and unspecific which concededly do not
conform to 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act per se and also it contains the elements of
personal information of third parties which is hit by 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act. In
this regard, the Complainant shall note that the outstretching the
interpretation of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act to include deductions and
inferences to be drawn by the CPIO is unwarranted as it casts immense
pressure on the CPIOs to ensure that they provide the correct
deduction/inference to avoid being subject to penal provisions under the 
RTI
Act
. For the sake of clarity, the provision of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act is
reproduced hereunder:

      "2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--

       (f) "information" means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in
any electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in
force;.."



His attention is also drawn towards a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
on the scope and ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act in the matter of CBSE vs.
Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors. [CIVIL APPEAL NO.6454 of 2011] wherein it was
held as under:

 
"35. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some misconceptions
  about the 
RTI Act
. 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is
  available and existing.........A public authority is also not required to furnish
  information which require drawing of inferences and/or making of
  assumptions. It is also not required to provide `advice' or `opinion' to an
  applicant, nor required to obtain and furnish any `opinion' or `advice' to an
  applicant. The reference to `opinion' or `advice' in the definition of
  `information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers to such material
  available in the records of the public authority. Many public authorities
  have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and opinion to
  the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused with any
  obligation under the 
RTI Act
." (Emphasis Supplied)

Similarly, in the matter of 
Khanapuram Gandaiah vs Administrative Officer &
Ors
 [SLP (CIVIL) NO.34868 OF 2009], Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:




      "6. 
Under the RTI Act
 "information" is defined under 
Section 2(f)
 which
provides:



       "information" means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, report, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force."



      This definition shows that an applicant under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act can
get any information which is already in existence and accessible to the public
authority under law. Of course, under the 
RTI Act
 an applicant is entitled to get
copy of the opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he cannot ask for any
information as to why such opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc. have been
passed...."



 
"7....Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material
which is not before him; or any information he could have obtained under law.
Under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such
information which can be accessed by the "public authority" under any other
law for the time being in force. The answers sought by the petitioner in the
application could not have been with the public authority nor could he have
had access to this information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged to give
any reasons as to why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was
before him...." (Emphasis Supplied)
 And, in the matter of 
Dr. Celsa Pinto, Ex-Officio Joint Secretary,(School
Education) vs. The Goa State Information Commission
 [2008 (110) Bom L R
1238], the Hon'ble Bombay High Court held as under:




      "..... In the first place, the Commission ought to have noticed that the Act
confers on the citizen the right to information. Information has been defined
by 
Section 2(f)
 as follows.



 
Section 2(f)
 -Information means any material in any form, including
records, documents, memos e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars,
orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material
held in any electronic form and information relating to any private body which
can be accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in
force;

      The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the question why
which would be the same thing as asking the reason for a justification for a
particular thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot expect to
communicate to the citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not
done in the sense of a justification because the citizen makes a requisition
about information. Justifications are matter within the domain of
adjudicating authorities and cannot properly be classified as information."

(Emphasis Supplied)

As far as applicability of exemption clause of 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act to
the instant matters are concerned, it can be garnered from a bare perusal of
the text of 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act as under:



   "8. Exemption from disclosure of information.--



      (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there shall be no
          obligation to give any citizen,
                                             xxxx

          (j) information which relates to personal information the disclosure of
      which has no relationship to any public activity or interest, or which
      would cause unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual unless
      the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information
      Officer or the appellate authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that
      the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such information;.."

 
In this regard, attention of the parties is also drawn towards a judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of Central Public Information
Officer, Supreme Court of 
India Vs. Subhash Chandra Agarwal
 in Civil Appeal
No. 10044 of 2010 with Civil Appeal No. 10045 of 2010 and Civil Appeal No.
2683 of 2010 wherein the import of "personal information" envisaged under

Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act has been exemplified in the context of earlier ratios

laid down by
 the same Court in the matter(
s) of Canara Bank Vs. C.S. Shyam
 in
Civil Appeal No.22 of 2009; 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande vs. Central
Information Commissioner & Ors.
, (2013) 1 SCC 212 and R.K. Jain vs. Union of
India & Anr., (2013) 14 SCC 794.The following was thus held:




       "59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion,
       would indicate that personal records, including name, address,
       physical, mental and psychological status, marks obtained, grades
       and answer sheets, are all treated as personal information. Similarly,
       professional records, including qualification, performance, evaluation
       reports, ACRs, disciplinary proceedings, etc. are all personal
       information. Medical records, treatment, choice of medicine, list of
       hospitals and doctors visited, findings recorded, including that of the
       family members, information relating to assets, liabilities, income tax
       returns, details of investments, lending and borrowing, etc. are
       personal information. Such personal information is entitled to
       protection from unwarranted invasion of privacy and conditional
       access is available when stipulation of larger public interest is
       satisfied. This list is indicative and not exhaustive..."



Nonetheless, the reply and as a sequel to it further clarifications tendered by
the CPIO during hearing is in the spirit of 
RTI Act
, merits of which cannot be
called into question.



Moreover, no penal action against the CPIO can be initiated in the absence of
any malafide ascribed on their part. 
In this regard, the attention of the
Complainant is drawn towards a judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in
the matter of 
Registrar of Companies & Ors. v. Dharmendra Kumar Garg &
Anr
. [W.P.(C) 11271/2009] dated 01.06.2012 wherein it was held:


      " 61. It can happen that the PIO may genuinely and bonafidely entertain
      the belief and hold the view that the information sought by the querist
      cannot be provided for one or the other reasons. Merely because the CIC
      eventually finds that the view taken by the PIO was not correct, it cannot
       automatically lead to issuance of a show cause notice under 
Section 20

      of the RTI Act and the imposition of penalty. The legislature has
      cautiously provided that only in cases of malafides or unreasonable
      conduct, i.e., where the PIO, without reasonable cause refuses to receive
      the application, or provide the information, or knowingly gives incorrect,
      incomplete or misleading information or destroys the information, that
      the personal penalty on the PIO can be imposed...."



Additionally, the following observation of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in

Bhagat Singh v. CIC & Ors. WP(C
) 3114/2007 are pertinent in this matter:




    "17. This Court takes a serious note of the two year delay in releasing
    information, the lack of adequate reasoning in the orders of the Public
    Information Officer and the Appellate Authority and the lack of application
    of mind in relation to the nature of information sought. The materials on
    record clearly show the lackadaisical approach of the second and third
    respondent in releasing the information sought. However, the Petitioner
    has not been able to demonstrate that they malafidely denied the
    information sought. Therefore, a direction to the Central Information
    Commission to initiate action under 
Section 20
 of the Act, cannot be
    issued."



Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the decision of Col. 
Rajendra
Singh v. Central Information Commission and Anr. WP (C
) 5469 of 2008 dated
20.03.2009 had held as under:




    "....
Section 20
, no doubt empowers the CIC to take penal action and direct
    payment of such compensation or penalty as is warranted. Yet the
    Commission has to be satisfied that the delay occurred was without
    reasonable cause or the request was denied malafidely.

                                        xxx
    ......The preceding discussion shows that at least in the opinion of this
    Court, there are no allegations to establish that the information was
    withheld malafide or unduly delayed so as to lead to an inference that
    petitioner was responsible for unreasonably withholding it."



The Commission also notes that Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana at
Chandigarh in Civil Writ Petition No.6504 of 2009 Date of decision:

04.03.2010 (
State of Punjab and others vs. State Information Commissioner,
Punjab and another
); had held as under:


      "3. The penalty provisions under 
Section 20
 is only to sensitize the public
     authorities that they should act with all due alacrity and not hold up
     information which a person seeks to obtain. It is not every delay that
     should be visited with penalty."



Having observed as above and considering the inability of the Complainant in
substantiating his level of dissatisfaction with the CPIO's reply in the instant
Complaints, no further action is warranted in the instant matters.



                The Complaint (s) are disposed of accordingly.




                                                Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहा न)
                                    Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु त)
Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत        त)


(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
दनांक /