[Cites 
19
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Neeraj Salodkar vs Securities And Exchange Board Of India ... on 28 December, 2022


Author: 
Vanaja N Sarna


Bench: 
Vanaja N Sarna


                          क य सुचना आयोग
                   CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
                            बाबा गंगनाथ माग
                           Baba Gangnath Marg
                       मु नरका, नई द ल - 110067
                       Munirka, New Delhi-110067

                                      File no.: - CIC/SEBIE/A/2021/632646
In the matter of
Neeraj Salodkar
                                                             ... Appellant
                                      VS
Central Public Information Officer
Securities and Exchange Board of India
SEBI Bhawan, Plot No. C4-A, G-Block,
Bandra Kurla Complex, Bandra (E)
Mumbai - 400 051
                                                             ...Respondent


RTI application filed on          :   24/03/2021
CPIO replied on                   :   19/04/2021
First appeal filed on             :   19/04/2021
First Appellate Authority order   :   18/05/2021
Second Appeal dated               :   26/07/2021
Date of Hearing                   :   27/12/2022
Date of Decision                  :   27/12/2022

The following were present:
Appellant: Present over VC

Respondent: Santosh Kumar Sharma, CGM and CPIO alongwith Pramila
Sridhar, CPIO, present over phone (Due to VC unavailability in Bandra East)

Information Sought:

The appellant has sought the following information:

1.    Provide a copy of the question paper of the SEBI Grade A (Legal stream)
Examination held on 27/02/2021. (No, they are not aware of teh questions)

2.    Provide a copy of the model answer key for the said examination.

(nobody provides)



                                         1


 3.    Provide a copy of the answers given by the candidate with Roll No.
1621001267 and registration No. 1870117054. (answer scripts are not
available)
Grounds for filing Second Appeal:

The CPIO did not provide the desired information.



Submissions made by Appellant and Respondent during Hearing:

The appellant in his second appeal submitted that the examination was
completely online. Moreover, the question paper, the answer key and even the
score card were not shared with the candidates. He also informed that the
results were declared on 18th March 2021.

He sought a copy of the information sought by him in the original application
and also declaration of IBPS as a Public Authority under the 
Right to
Information Act, 2005
.

He relied on a decision in Sh. Krishan Kumar Gupta v. Central Public
Information Officer, IBPS [Complaint no. CIC/MP/C/2016/00219], wherein it
was held that
      "it is clear from the record and the statement made by the complainant
      that the respondent has conducted examination on behalf of the
      Allahabad Bank, therefore, Allahabad Bank is also the custodian of
      records" and "the Deputy Registrar is directed to send a complete file to
      the CPIO Allahabad H.O, who in turn should reply to the appellant on his
      RTI application dated 23.06.2016, within 30 days from the date of receipt
      of this order. The CPIO, Allahabad Bank H.O., if necessary, may take
      assistance from the respondent."

He pointed out that in the above case; on 29.09.2017 the CIC in its decision
stated that even though the IBPS is not a Public Authority within the
framework of the 
Right to Information Act, 2005
, the bank which conducted
the examination through the IBPS is the custodian of the information. The
Allahabad Bank was held to be the custodian of information and was directed
to furnish the information.

He further submitted that the above facts apply directly to the appeal at hand.
IBPS conducted the examination for SEBI and so, using the ratio decidendi of



                                      2

 the above judgement of the CIC, SEBI becomes the custodian of the
information and must be compelled to furnish the information.



He further relied on a decision in 
Priyanka Tyagi v. Reserve Bank of India
Appeal
 no. CIC/MP/A/2014/002534, 29/09/2017 the following was held by the
CIC:


     "(f) "information" means any material in any form, including records,
     documents, memos, emails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars,
     orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data
     material held in any electronic form and information relating to any
     private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other
     law for the time being in force."

      In view of this, it is essential that Banks/Insurance Companies should
     provide information after getting records from IBPS. Where recruitment
     is being done for several Banks, a nodal Bank should be appointed which
     should receive all records from IBPS and reply to RTI applications and
     grievances etc. This measure is necessary to restore the confidence of the
     public in the recruitment/promotion process of the banks, insurance
     companies. Wide publicity to this arrangement should be given to enable
     candidates/employees/public to lodge RTI applications."
      Also, the following was also said:

     "The Commission is of the view that public authorities like Public Sector
     Banks, Public Sector Insurance Companies etc. should evolve a system to
     ensure accountability and transparency in the recruitment of fresh
     candidates and promotion of employees. The Commission is of the view
     that the IBPS is working as an outsourced agent for the public authorities
     viz Banks etc. The present situation is that IBPS is not a public authority.
     The Banks, Insurance Companies etc. in the public sector are public
     authorities. In pursuance of the 
RTI Act, 2005
, these public authorities
     are fully responsible as per the 
RTI Act, 2005
 to maintain transparency
     and accountability in fresh recruitments and promotions. However, today
     neither Bank/Insurance Cos., nor IBPS is providing this information. The
     Commission is of the view that since IBPS is not a public authority, Banks


                                       3

       and Insurance Companies should be answerable to the
      candidates/employees/public     for    providing     information  on
      recruitment/promotion process. They should also address grievances in
      the matters. The Commission is receiving large number of
      appeals/complaints     and      grievances      with      regard   to
      recruitment/promotion process followed by IBPS."

He summed up stating that for the sake of transparency, it is imperative that
SEBI furnishes a copy of the following: a) The question paper; b) The answer
key; c) The score card
He also stated that all this should be published for the sake of transparency
and fairness. The present situation in the IBPS mandates that the candidates
get nothing after giving the examination. He argued that delegation of an
important work from the government to the private sector does not shirk off
the duty of the government to remain fair and transparent. In case the IAS and
UPSC examinations are delegated to a private organization, the UPSC still has
the responsibility of being transparent and fair. The Public Authority must
remain responsible for the actions, even though the same may be delegated to
a private authority.

He relied in 
Central Board of Secondary Education and another v. Aditya
Bandopadhyay and others
 (2011) 8 SCC 497, wherein the following was held:


      "When a candidate participates in an examination and writes his
      answers in an answer book and submits it to the examining body for
      evaluation and declaration of the result, the answer book is a document
      or record. When the answer book is evaluated by an examiner appointed
      by the examining body, the evaluated answer book becomes a record
      containing the "opinion" of the examiner. Therefore, the evaluated
      answer book is also an "information" under the 
RTI Act
."

      It was further held that
      "Having regard to 
Section 3
, the citizens have the right to access to all
      the information held by or under the control of any public authority
      except those excluded or exempted under the Act. The object of the Act
      is to empower the citizens to fight against corruption and hold the
      Government and their instrumentalities accountable to the citizens, by
      providing them access to information regarding functioning of every
      public authority."

                                      4


 He further relied on the decision in Cyril Michael and others v. Institute of
Banking Personnel Selection (IBPS) [CIC/SM/A/2010/000873], where in the
year 2012 the IBPS was declared to be a public authority. He also stated that
the decision of the CIC was set aside by the CIC itself in Ashwani Kumar Avasthi
v. IBPS [CIC/DS/A/2011/000802] on 09.01.2012. It was held that the IBPS is not
a public authority under the 
RTI Act, 2005
.

Observations:

At the outset it was noted that in Ashwani Kumar Avasthi v. IBPS
[CIC/DS/A/2011/000802] on 09.01.2012, it was held as follows by the CIC:

      2. The second issue is whether 
RTI Act, 2005
 is applicable to the IBPS,
      Mumbai         (Institute of Banking Personnel Selection). The IBPS
      has been permitted by the Department of Financial Services,
      Ministry             of         Finance,          Government            of
      India vide letter no. 10/30/1/2010IR dated 20 September 2010
      to conduct Common Recruitment Programme for selection of both Clerks
        and Officers in Public Sector Banks. This means that the
      Government of India, vide this letter, has delegated
      monopoly power for recruitment in Public Sector Banks to the IBPS, Mum
      bai probably at the behest of the Public Sector Banks as       such    a
      proposal      was       sent  to    the    Ministry    by    the    Indian
      Appeal: No. CIC/DS/A/2011/000802 Banks Association Mumbai vide
      letter      no.         HR     & IR/MV/Govt./S/1120 Dated 21.08.2010
      IBPS is an autonomous body registered as a Public Trust under
      the Bombay Public Trust Act of 1950 and as a Scientific and Industrial
      Research Organization by the Department of Scientific and
      Industrial        Research,       Ministry      of       Science      and
      Technology, Government of India. Further, the Governing Board of IBPS
         consists of nominees from Reserve Bank of India,
      Ministry of Finance (Government of India), National Institute of Bank
      Management, representatives of Public Sector Banks, and
      Insurance Sector. The matters related to policy and affairs of
      the     Institute      are   vested     in    the    Governing      Board.

      This leads us to conclude that IBPS is an organization which is controlled
        by the Government as well as agencies and instrumentalities
      of the State falling under the heading "other authorities" within
       the meaning of 
Article 12
 of the Constitution of India.

                                       5


 
In 
Kishan Kumar Gupta v. IBPS [CIC/MP/C/2016/000219
], the Chief Information
Commissioner (CIC) held that the IBPS had conducted the examination on
behalf of the Allahabad Bank; therefore, Allahabad bank is the custodian of the
information. It was directed by the CIC to furnish the information about the
results of the examination to the complainant.




Primarily, the issue at hand is whether the information sought by the appellant
can be provided by SEBI. As far as the appellant's prayer for declaring IBPS as a
public authority is concerned, the same is not being adjudicated by this bench
as the RTI application was not filed with IBPS.

Be that as it may, it was found pertinent to discuss the legal position, at the
present juncture and the Commission noted that the Supreme Court of India in
the matter of Rajbir Surajbhan Singh vs The Chairman, IBPS on 29 April, 2019
had held as under:

 
15. This Court in 
Federal Bank
 case held that a Writ Petition under 
Article
      226
 of the Constitution is not maintainable against a scheduled bank on
      the ground that the business of banking does not fall within the
      expression "public duty". As the activity of the Respondent of conducting
      the selection process for appointment to the banks is voluntary in nature,
      it cannot be said that there is any public function discharged by the
      Respondent. There is no positive obligation, either statutory or otherwise
      on the Respondent to conduct the recruitment tests. For the reasons
      above, we are of the considered opinion that the Respondent is not
      amenable to the Writ Jurisdiction under 
Article 32
 or 
Article 226
 of the
      Constitution of India.


The above judgment was relied upon by the Kerala High Court in the case of
Lathika.D vs IBPS, WP(C).No.18508 OF 2019(K) in its decision dated 24 January,
2020 as follows:

 
"The Apex Court has in the judgment in 
Rajbir Surajbhan Singh v.
      Chairman, Institute of Banking Personnel Selection, Mumbai
 [2019 SCC
      OnLine SC 631] has held that the Writ Petition is not maintainable as
      against the 1st respondent under 
Article 226
 of the Constitution of India.
      In the light of the same the petitioner does not deserve any relief from
      this Court under 
Article 226
 of the Constitution of India."


On 16.12.2022 in WP(C).No.17635 OF 2020(D), the Kerala HC again relied on
the following:

                                       6


 
"In 
Rajbir Surajbhan Singh v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection
:


     (2019) 14 SCC 189 it was held in para.14 as follows:

     "14. The respondent - Institute has been set up for the purpose of
     conducting recruitment for appointment to various posts in Public Sector
     Banks and other financial institutions. Applying the tests mentioned
     above, we are of the opinion that the High Court is right in holding that
     the Writ Petition is not maintainable against the Respondent.
     Conducting recruitment tests for appointment in banking and other
     financial institutions, is not a public duty. The Respondent is not a
     creature of a statute and there are no statutory duties or obligations
     imposed on the Respondent.

 
15. It is true that the Governor of Reserve Bank of India and the
     Chairmen of certain public sector banks along with the Joint Secretary,
     Banking Division, Ministry of Finance are members of the governing
     body of the respondent Institute. There is no dispute that the
     respondent is not constituted under a statute. It is also not disputed
     that the respondent does not receive any funds from the Government.
     The respondent is not controlled by the Government. The letter dated
     20.9.2010 produced by the appellant along with the rejoinder-affidavit
     does not show deep and pervasive control by the Government of India.
     The question is whether the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
     fell under "other authorities" within the meaning of 
Article 12
 was
     referred to a seven-Judge Bench of this Court. (See 
Pradeep Kumar
     Biswas v. Indian Institute of Chemical Biology
)."


In the matter of 
Priyanka Vs. The Director, Institute of Banking Personnel
Selection (IBPS) & Ors. WP(C) No.
 11 of 2019 decision dated 27.02.2020, the
Meghalaya High Court held -


 
"that prayer that the respondent be directed to appoint the petitioner in
     the vacant posts of Office Assistant in the Meghalaya Rural Bank by
     operating the reserve list, it was held that the Court need not go into
     other aspects of the matter to decide this matter because the Supreme
     Court in 
Rajbir Surajbhan Singh Vs. The Chairman, Institute of Banking
     Personnel Selection, Mumbai
 has authoritatively held that the IBPS is
     not a State under 
Article 12
 of the Constitution of India, therefore, the
     writ petition under 
Article 226
 of the Constitution of India would not


                                     7

       be maintainable - the respondent-IBPS holds the recruitment for large
      number of Banks throughout the country, therefore, it has to be one-
      time exercise - When the candidates are selected on merit to different
      Banks, even if some of the candidates do not join, it is difficult to
      undertake another exercise for operating the reserve list, which is
      possible, only if the recruitment is held by a single recruitment agency
      for one employer or the employer itself."




Coming back to the question regarding the copy of the question paper of the
SEBI Grade A (Legal stream) Examination held on 27.02.2021, is concerned, the
SEBI was asked to take assistance from IBPS and examine whether the same
being a limited question bank cannot be provided, or can be provided to which
the CPIO submitted that they are not aware of the same.
In respect of the model answer key, it was stated that no such answer key is
available. Regarding the question whether the answer key was uploaded on
the website after the examination by IBPS, no concrete answer could be given
by the CPIO.

And as far as copy of the answers given by the candidate with Roll No.
1621001267 and registration No. 1870117054 are concerned, the CPIO should
check whether candidates were allowed to access the answer sheets by IBPS in
the portal for a limited time, if not, the same should be intimated to the
appellant.

It was checked from the SEBI website and found that the List of roll numbers
shortlisted were uploaded on their website. Moreover, in case IBPS is the
agency conducting the examination the same was nowhere mentioned in the
advertisement issued by SEBI. For instance, RRB conducting examination
through IBPS issues notification also in the name IBPS CRP RRBs. Be that as it
may, when the advertisement is issued by SEBI, results are declared on the
SEBI website, the SEBI cannot brush aside its responsibility by stating that they
are not maintaining such information or are not required to collect
information. The outsourcing of a work is justified however, the same does
not absolve the public authority from its responsibility of being transparent.
The Delhi High Court in the matter of 
Registrar of Companies & Ors vs
Dharmendra Kumar Garg & Anr
 on 1 June, 2012 held as follows:




                                       8


 31. In the context of the object of the 
RTI Act
, and the various provisions
thereof, in my view, the said expression ―held by or under the control of
any public authority used in 
section 2(j)
 of the RTI Act deserves a wider
and a more meaningful interpretaHon. The expression ―Hold is defined
in the Black's Law dictionary, 6th Edition, inter alia, in the same way as
―to keep i.e. to retain, to maintain possession of, or authority over.



32. The expression ―held is also defined in the Shorter Oxford
DicHonary, inter alia, as ―prevent from getting away; keep fast, grasp,
have a grip on. It is also deﬁned, inter alia, as ―not let go; keep, retain".



33. The expression ―control is defined in the Advanced Law Lexicon by
P.N. Ramanatha Aiyar 3rd Edition Reprint 2009 and it reads as follows:

      "(As a verb) To restrain; to check; to regulate; to govern; to keep
      under check; to hold in restraint; to dominate; to rule and direct;
      to counteract; to exercise a directing, restraining or governing
      influence over; to govern with reference thereto; to subject to
      authority; to have under command, and authority over, to have
      authority over the particular matter. (Ame. Cyc)"



34. From the above, it appears that the expression ―held by or ―under
the control of any public authority, in relaHon to ―informaHon, means
that information which is held by the public authority under its control
to the exclusion of others. It cannot mean that information which the
public authority has already ―let go‖, i.e. shared generally with the
citizens, and also that information, in respect of which there is a
statutory mechanism evolved, (independent of the 
RTI Act
) which obliges
the public authority to share the same with the citizenry by following the
prescribed procedure, and upon fulfilment of the prescribed conditions.
This is so, because in respect of such information, which the public
authority is statutorily obliged to disseminate, it cannot be said that the
public authority ―holds or ―controls the same. There is no exclusivity in
such holding or control. In fact, the control vests in the seeker of the
information who has only to operate the statutorily prescribed
mechanism to access the information. It is not this kind of information,
which appears to fall within the meaning of the expression ―right to
information, as the information in relation to which the ―right to

                                  9

       information is specifically conferred by the 
RTI Act
 is that information
      which "is held by or under the control of any public authority".
The Delhi High Court in the matter of 
Election Commission Of India vs Central
Information Commission
 & ... on 4 November, 2009 held as under:


      The words "held by" in 
section 2(j)
 in the context of the 
RTI Act
 will
      include not only information under the legal control of the public
      authority but also all information which is otherwise available with them.
      The public authority should have dominion over the information or
      semblance of the right to the material which constitutes information. The
      words "held by or under the control of an public authority" are to be
      given a broad and wide meaning but at the same time cannot include
      information to which access is denied to a public authority itself under
      any other statutory enactment. If there is a prohibition or bar under an
      enactment and the public authority is disabled and prevented access to
      material or information, the bar or prohibition is not undone or erased
      by the 
RTI Act
. Similarly, if there is a pre-condition before a public
      authority can access information under any other enactment, the said
      pre-condition should be satisfied. Right to information from a public
      authority requires the public authoritys corresponding right to access the
      said information. If there is an absolute or complete bar on the public
      authoritys right to access information then such information cannot be
      supplied and if there is a partial bar or pre-condition, then the pre-
      condition should be satisfied before information is furnished.



      23. Thus, to word it differently, material/details to which the public
      authority has access must be furnished, subject to the exemptions under
      the 
RTI Act
. However, if the public authority is denied access or cannot
      have access to due to any limitation or restriction under a WPC statute,
      the material does not constitute „information‟ under the 
RTI Act
. Once
      statutory precondition for access by the public authority to
      material/details is satisfied, the material/details are "information" within
      the meaning of 
section 2(f)
 and a citizen has a right to access
      "information". The requirement is that the public authority should have
      right to access information which is "held by or under the control of any
      public authority".



                                       10


      24. Any other interpretation of the foregoing sections of the 
RTI Act
, will
     lead to incongruous and unacceptable results, with a statutory
     protection or prohibition in another enactment being nullified by filing an
     application under the 
RTI Act
. The legislature has therefore in 
Section
     2 (f)
 of the RTI Act, carefully used the words "accessed by a public
     authority under any other law" before a right to information accrues and
     information is "held by or under the control of any public authority."

     Where a public authority is disabled till satisfaction of certain conditions
     or is prohibited from having access to any information, the provisions of
     the third enactment continue to apply and are not re-written or over-
     written by the 
RTI Act
.



     25. When information is accessible to a public authority and is held or
     under its control, then the information must be furnished to the
     information seeker under the 
RTI Act
, even if there are conditions or
     prohibitions under another statute already in force or under the 
Official
     Secrets Act
 that restricts or prohibits access to information to public.
     Prohibition or conditions which prevent a citizen from having access to
     information in view of the non obstante clause in 
Section 22
 of the RTI
     Act do not apply. Restriction on rights of citizens is erased. However,
     when access to information by a public authority itself is prohibited or is
     accessible subject to conditions, then the prohibition is not obliterated
     and the pre-conditions are not erased. 
Section 22
 of the RTI Act is a key
     which unlocks prohibitions/limitations in any prior enactment on right of
     a citizen to access information accessible to a public authority. It is not a
     key with the public authority that can be used to undo and erase
     prohibitions/limitations on the right of public authority to access
     information.

In the matter of 
Cen.Pub.Information ... vs Subhash Chandra Agarwal
 on 13
November, 2019 the Supreme Court held as under:


     "11. Both the terms ―public authority and ―informaHon have been
     broadly defined. 
Section 2(j)
 which deﬁnes the ―right to informaHon
     stipulates that the information accessible under the 
RTI Act
 is held by or
     under the control of any ―public authority, which is defined in 
Section
     2(h)
 of the RTI Act. 
Section 3
 of the Act confers on all citizens the



                                       11

       substantive right to seek information covered within the ambit of the
      Act, subject to its provisions."

Therefore, in light of the above discussion, the CPIO SEBI shall take assistance
from IBPS as they have control over the information sought and provide a
revised reply on all the three points.

Decision:

The CPIO's plea that IBPS is following their own rules and they have no
responsibility to procure information was recorded. However, in the spirit of
transparency, the CPIO was directed to coordinate with IBPS and then provide
a revised reply on all the three points suitably addressing the queries raised by
the appellant, within 7 days from the date of receipt of the order.The SEBI is
also advised to devise a system of more transparency in providing information
after various exams are held and co-ordinate with IBPS for the same to avoid
unnecessary individual RTI applications on this matter in future. This advice is
given in the interest of transparency in conducting exams and for the benefit of
the examinees with regard to information being sought on this subject matter
.Suo moto disclosure of maximum information on SEBI's website will go a long
way in addressing the examinee's grievances.

            The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                             Vanaja N. Sarna (वनजा एन. सरना)
                                     Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु!त)




Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत          त)


A.K. Assija (ऐ.के. असीजा)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011- 26182594 /
 दनांक / Date


                                       12