[Cites 
35
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Sandip Kumar vs Food Corporation Of India on 18 July, 2024


Author: 
Heeralal Samariya


Bench: 
Heeralal Samariya


                                 के न्द्रीय सूचना आयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                             बाबा गंगनाथ मार्ग, मुनिरका
                        Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                         नई दिल्ली, New Delhi - 110067

द्वितीय अपील संख्या / Second Appeal No. CIC/FCIND/A/2023/617544

Shri Sandip Kumar                                              ... अपीलकर्ता/Appellant

                                   VERSUS/बनाम

CPIO, Food Corporation of India, New Delhi                  ...प्रतिवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                            :   10.06.2024
Date of Decision                           :   16.07.2024
Chief Information Commissioner             :   Shri Heeralal Samariya

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:
 RTI application filed on         :            14.11.2022
 PIO replied on                   :            22.11.2022
 First Appeal filed on            :            23.11.2022

First Appellate Order on               :       06.12.2022

2ndAppeal/complaint received on        :       06.04.2023


Information sought
 and background of the case:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 14.11.2022 seeking information
on following points:-



     "Please provide Provident Fund Trust and Pension Trust Investment
     Details from 1-Jan-2020 to 31-Oct-2022. I require this information for all
     the Provident Fund Trust and Pension Fund Trust you have. Please
     Provide:-



     1) Name of Security Bought


     2) Their ISIN No


     3) Purchase Yield (YTM)


     4) Purchase Price


     5) Value Date / Date of Investment


     6) Quantum in Lakh/Crores


     7) Name of Counterparty/Broker/Advisor from where it was bought"



                                                                        Page 1 of 12


  The CPIO and DGM (CPF), FCI New Delhi vide letter dated 22.11.2022
 replied as under:-



      "FCI CPF Trust does not fall under the definition of "Public Authority"

      under 
section 2(h)
 of RTI Act 2005. Hence, the RTI Act-2005 does not
      apply on FCI CPF Trust."



 Dissatisfied with the response received from the CPIO, the Appellant filed a
 First Appeal dated 23.11.2022. The FAA vide order dated 06.12.2022 stated
 as under:-



      "The subject matter of the information requested by the above applicant
      is related to pertain to providing Provident Fund

      Trust Investment details from 01.01.2020 to 31.10.2022. FCI CPF Trust
      does not fall under the definition of "Public Authority" under 
section 2(h)

      of RTI Act 2005. Hence, the RTI Act-2005 does not apply on FCI CPF
      Trust.



      Accordingly, the said Appeal dated 23.11.2022 stands disposed off."



 Aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Appellant approached the Commission with
 the instant Second Appeal.



Facts emerging in Course of Hearing:



Appellant: Present

Respondent: 1. Shri Dewkant Das, CPIO and DGM (CPF)


2. Shri Rajeev Sharma, Advocate

The Appellant stated that satisfactory response was not provided to him, till
date. He stated that the Provident Fund Trust (PF Trust) manages employee's
money in fiduciary responsibility. It is Employees money. 12% is deducted
from Employees salary and GOI/IOCL contributes another 12% of the Basic
Salary which is then invested under this PF trust to generate returns. All
these investment transactions are done in excel, calculated and checked in
excel before finalising the trade. Thereafter Deal Confirmation is made and
exchanged before the settlement. The PF trust faces continuous inflow and
outflow of funds, it is near to impossible to keep track without excel or any
related software. However, despite the overwhelming larger public interest of
transparency in disclosure of investments made of PF funds collected from
the employees, the concerned office is not disclosing the details.



Shri Rajeev Sharma referred to the written submission of the CPIO cum Dy
GM (CPF), FCI, New Delhi the relevant extracts of which are as under:



       "...............the Appellant has made very vague and unspecific
       submissions to support his contention that FCI CPF Trust falls under
       the definition of Public Authority. The Appellant seems to have
       contended that FCI comes under DFPD, Ministry of Consumer Affairs,

                                                                       Page 2 of 12

 Food & Public Distribution and since the aforesaid Ministry comes
under 
RTI Act
, the FCI CPF Trust automatically comes under the said
Act.



The public authority has been defined under 
section 2 (h)
 of the RTI Act.
The CPF trust does not fall under the definition of public authority as
same has not been created under any statute. The trust is an altogether
independent body from the FCI, the Trust is not controlled,
substantially financed/financed directly or indirectly by the appropriate
government. The CPF trust also independently assesses and files its
independent Income tax return.



Even otherwise information sought by the Applicant is also under the
category of 
section 8(1) (j)
 as applicant is asking for the personal
information of the trust. Information which has been sought relates to
personal information, the disclosure of which has no relationship to any
public activity or interest, or which would cause unwarranted invasion
of the privacy of the individual Trust.



It was also submitted that FCI, FCI CPF Trust and Ministry of
Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution are different legal entities.
Therefore, merely because the controlling Ministry is a public authority
does not ipso facto imply that every trust, society, association etc.
formed in a statutory corporation like FCI under the said Ministry would
be a public authority under 
RTI Act
.



It may be pertinent to mention here that the same issue was involved in
the case titled "
NORTHERN ZONE RAILWAY EMPLOYEES CO-
OPERATIVE THRIFT AND CREDIT SOCIETY LTD versus CENTRAL
REGISTRAR COOPERATIVE SOCIETY AND ORS
" which was decided by
Hon'ble Delhi High Court vide judgement dated 16.01.2012. (copy
attached)

In the aforesaid case CIC had held that Northern Zone Railway
Employees Cooperative Thrift and Credit Society Ltd was a public
authority within the meaning of 
section 2(h)
 of RTI Act. Setting aside the
judgement of CIC, Hon'ble Delhi High Court has held as under:




      "For an authority or body or institution to be classified as a public
      authority under clause (b) of 
Section 2(h)
, what is necessary is
      that the authority, body or institution is established or constituted
      by a law made by Parliament. Consciously, the Parliament has
      not used the expression "under any other law made by
      Parliament", Therefore, the authority or body or institution should
      be created by, and come into existence by the statute framed by
      the Parliament, and not under the statute so framed. For
      example, a company is constituted under the 
Companies Act
. It
      cannot be said that a company is constituted "by a law made by
      Parliament". For it to be classified as on authority or body or
      institution under clause (b) or 
Section 2(h)
, it should be a
      statutory corporation."



                                                                Page 3 of 12


        Applying the above principle to FCI CPF Trust, it emerges that the said
       Trust was established under FCI CPF Trust Regulations which in turn
       were framed under 
Section 45
 of Food Corporations Act, 1964. The
       Food Corporation of India is a public authority since it has been created
       by and has come into existence by the statute framed by the
       Parliament, which is 
Food Corporations Act, 1964
. But FCI CPF Trust is
       not a public authority since it has not been created by any statute
       framed by the Parliament. Source of its creation is FCI CPF Regulations
       which have been framed by FCI under 
Food Corporations Act, 1964
.



       In another case titled "Mrs. S. Booma Vs Reliance Employees Provident
       Fund, Bombay" CIC in its judgment dated 18.6.2014 has examined at a
       great length the issue as to whether the Provident Fund Trust namely,
       Reliance Employees Provident Fund can be termed as public authority
       under 
RTI Act
. The Hon'ble Commission has observed in the said,
       judgement that:



       "Merely providing subsidies, grants, exemptions, privileges etc., as
       such, cannot be said to be providing funding to a substantial extent,
       unless the record shows that the funding was so substantial to the
       body which practically runs by such funding and but for such funding,
       it would struggle to exist."



       In the said case, the Hon'ble Commission has also observed that" The
       mere 'supervision' or 'regulation' as such by a statute or otherwise of a
       body would not make that body a "public authority" within the meaning
       of 
Section 2(h)(d)(i)
 of the RTI Act". As such, the mere fact that FCI CPF
       Trust is managed by officers on the payroll of FCI does not make it a
       public authority. The Trust is independent since it is not a body owned
       by FCI or substantially controlled and financed by FCI.



       The other pleas relating to utility of excel sheet for keeping track of the
       investments are completely vague and irrelevant. It may also be
       pertinent to mention that the Appellant has stated in the Appeal that
       NAFED contributes 12%. The fact of the matter is that NAFED has
       nothing to do with FCI CPF Trust. While it may be purely typographical
       error but it clearly indicates that the Appellant may be asking for
       similar information from other Corporations/Departments/Trusts also
       and it is quite likely that all these applications are motivated by some
       vested interests rather than public interest and thus, the Appeal of the
       Appellant is against the very spirit, object and purpose of the 
RTI Act
."



Decision:



Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by both the
parties, the Commission is of the view that FCI CPF Trust is a public
authority as defined
 u/s 2 (h)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 for the reasons mentioned
as follows.



At the outset 
Section 2 (h)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 which defines a public
authority is reproduced below:



                                                                       Page 4 of 12


 
Section2 (h)
: "public authority" means any authority or body or
       institution of self- government established or constituted--



             (a) by or under the Constitution;

             (b) by any other law made by Parliament;

             (c) by any other law made by State Legislature;

             (d) by notification issued or order made by the appropriate
                Government, and includes any--



             (i) body owned, controlled or substantially financed;

             (ii) non-Government organisation substantially financed,

             directly or indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate
             Government;



In the present instance, it has to be examined if the CPF Trust falls under any
of the above mentioned categories to be classified as a public authority.



To establish this, the Commission would briefly touch upon the background
of the constitution of FCI CPF Trust. The trust owes its existence to the FCI
CPF Regulations, 1967 which applies to the employees of FCI other than
those who opt for pensionary benefits. As per 
Regulation 4
, the Assets of the
Fund are essentially


       (a) Contributions of the corporation and subscription made by the
       members in terms of these Regulations;



       (b) Interest which may accrue on such contributions and subscriptions;



       (c) Balance transferred from any other Provident Fund where such
       transfers are authorised by the Managing Director;



       (d) Moneys lapsed to the Fund in accordance with the provisions of
       
Regulation 26
 or sub-regulation (2) of 
Regulation 27
.



       (e) Other receipts (including donations from the Corporation) if any.



The Fund established under the Regulations is administered by a Board of
Trustees which as per 
Regulation 5
 (Amended vide Circular No.EP-07-2013-
17 dated 11.10.2013) shall consist of the following members:



       i. Executive Director (Finance)- Ex-Officio President of the Board
       of Trustees

       ii. Five Executive Directors (Zone) representing North, South,
       West, East, and North East Zones will be ex-officio Trustees.



       iii. Six representatives of employees, of which atleast one should be
       from recognized staff unions, atleast 1 from officers association, and
       atleast 1 from workers association/union to be nominated by the



                                                                       Page 5 of 12

        employer from amongst the recommended by the recognized staff
       unions/officers/workers association.



       ..................................



       2) The General Manager (CPF) of Headquarters or in case no such
       officer is posted, an officer not below the rank of General
       Manager nominated by the President of the Board shall
       discharge the functions of the Secretary to the Board. The
       Secretary shall have the assistance of such staff as provided by
       the Corporation from time to time. It shall be the duty of the
       Secretary to convene meetings of the Board, keep records
       thereof, maintain accounts of the Fund and to carry out
       decisions taken by the Board from time to time."



The presence of the officers/ employees of the Food Corporation of India in
the Board of Trustees of the FCI CPF Trust prima facie indicates that there is
substantial control over the affairs of the Trust in the hand of the corporation.



On examination of the provisions of the FCI CPF Regulations, 1967, it is
further clear for the following reasons that FCI (a public authority)
substantially finances and controls the affairs of the CPF Trust which also
owes its existence to FCI:



1. Firstly, 
Regulation 7
 stipulates the provisions regarding resignation of a
trustee and states that a Trustee other than the ex-officio Trustee may resign
his office by a letter addressed to the Managing Director of the
Corporation and the office shall remain vacant from the date his resignation
is accepted by the Managing Director.



2. Secondly, as per 
Regulation 8
 any question of whether any person is
disqualified to be a Trustee shall be referred to the Managing Director of
the Corporation whose declaration on the question shall be final.



3. Thirdly, The power to call meetings has been bestowed on the
President of the Fund as per 
Regulation 9
 who is essentially the
Executive Director (Finance) of the Corporation.



4. Fourthly, it is also important to note that as per 
Regulation 12
 all
expenses relating to the administration of the Fund including the pay
and allowances of the staff appointed for the purpose of administering
the Fund shall be borne by the Corporation and shall not be charged to
the Fund. As per 
Regulation 12 (2)
, the grant of travel allowance is also
borne by the Corporation.



5. Fifthly, As per Rule 19 All member accounts shall be maintained at zonal
offices or any other offices of the Corporation as may be decided by the
Corporation.



                                                                       Page 6 of 12


 The legal position with regard to meaning of the terms "owned/ controlled or
substantially financed" u/s 2 (h) (d) (i) of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 has been settled
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its decision dated 07/10/2013 (Civil Appeal
No 9017 of 2013 Thalappalam Ser. Coop. Bank Ltd and ors VS State of Kerala
and ors.) as under:-



       "31. 
The RTI Act
, therefore, deals with bodies which are owned,
       controlled or substantially financed, directly or indirectly, by funds
       provided by the appropriate government and also non-government
       organizations substantially financed, directly or indirectly, by funds
       provided by the appropriate government, in the event of which they
       may fall within the definition of 
Section 2(h)(d)(i)
 or (ii) respectively. As
       already pointed out, a body, institution or an organization, which is
       neither a State within the meaning of 
Article 12
 of the Constitution or
       instrumentalities, may still answer the definition of public authority
       under 
Section 2(h)
d (i) or (ii).



       (a) Body owned by the appropriate government - A body owned by
       the appropriate government clearly falls under 
Section 2(h)(d)(i)
 of the
       Act. A body owned, means to have a good legal title to it having the
       ultimate control over the affairs of that body, ownership takes in its fold
       control, finance etc. Further discussion of this concept is unnecessary
       because, admittedly, the societies in question are not owned by the
       appropriate government.



       (b) Body Controlled by the Appropriate Government A body which
       is controlled by the appropriate government can fall under the definition
       of public authority under Section 2h(d)(i). Let us examine the meaning of
       the expression "controlled" in the context of 
RTI Act
 and not in the
       context of the expression "controlled" judicially interpreted while
       examining the scope of the expression "State" under 
Article 12
 of the
       Constitution or in the context of maintainability of a writ against a body
       or authority under 
Article 226
 of the Constitution of India.



       The word "control" or "controlled" has not been defined in the 
RTI Act
,
       and hence, we have to understand the scope of the expression
       'controlled' in the context of the words which exist prior and subsequent
       i.e. "body owned" and "substantially financed" respectively. The
       meaning of the word "control" has come up for consideration in several
       cases before this Court in different contexts. 
In 
State of West Bengal
       and another v. Nripendra Nath Bagchi
, AIR 1966 SC 447 while
       interpreting the scope of 
Article 235
 of the Constitution of India, which
       confers control by the High Court over District Courts, this Court held
       that the word "control" includes the power to take disciplinary action
       and all other incidental or consequential steps to effectuate this end
       and made the following observations : "The word 'control', as we have
       seen, was used for the first time in the Constitution and it is
       accompanied by the word 'vest' which is a strong word. It shows that
       the High Court is made the sole custodian of the control over the
       judiciary. Control, therefore, is not merely the power to arrange the day
       to day working of the court but contemplates disciplinary jurisdiction
       over the presiding Judge.... In our judgment, the control which is vested

                                                                         Page 7 of 12

 in the High Court is a complete control subject only to the power of the
Governor in the matter of appointment (including dismissal and
removal) and posting and promotion of District Judges. Within the
exercise of the control vested in the High Court, the High Court can hold
enquiries, impose punishments other than dismissal or removal, ..."




32. The above position has been reiterated by this Court in 
Chief
Justice of Andhra Pradesh and others v. L.V.A. Dixitulu and others

(1979) 2 SCC 34.
 
In 
Corporation of the City of Nagpur Civil Lines,
Nagpur and another v. Ramchandra and others
 (1981) 2 SCC 714,
while interpreting the provisions of Section 59(3) of the City of
Nagpur
Corporation Act, 1948
, this Court held as follows :




      "4. It is thus now settled by this Court that the term "control" is of
      a very wide connotation and amplitude and includes a large
      variety of powers which are incidental or consequential to
      achieve the powers-vested in the authority concerned......."



33. The word "control" is also sometimes used synonyms with
superintendence, management or authority to direct, restrict or regulate
by a superior authority in exercise of its supervisory power. This Court
in 
The Shamrao Vithal Cooperative Bank Ltd. v. Kasargode
Pandhuranga Mallya
 (1972) 4 SCC 600, held that the word "control"
does not comprehend within itself the adjudication of a claim made by
a co-operative society against its members.
 
The meaning of the word
"control" has also been considered by this Court in 
State of Mysore v.
Allum Karibasappa & Ors.
 (1974) 2 SCC 498, while interpreting Section
54 of the Mysore Cooperative Societies Act, 1959 and Court held that
the word "control" suggests check, restraint or influence and intended
to regulate and hold in check and restraint from action.
 
The expression
"control" again came up forconsideration before this Court in 
Madan
Mohan Choudhary v. State of Bihar & Ors.
 (1999) 3 SCC 396, in the
context of 
Article 235
 of the Constitution and the Court held that the
expression "control" includes disciplinary control, transfer, promotion,
confirmation, including transfer of a District Judge or recall of a District
Judge posted on excadre post or on deputation or on administrative
post etc. so also premature and compulsory retirement.
 
Reference may
also be made to few other judgments of this Court reported in Gauhati
High Court and 
another v. Kuladhar Phukan and another
 (2002) 4 SCC
524, State of Haryana v. Inder Prakash Anand HCS and others (1976)
2 SCC 977, High Court of Judicature for 
Rajasthan v. Ramesh Chand
Paliwal and Another
 (
1998) 3 SCC 72, Kanhaiya Lal Omar v. R.K.
Trivedi and others
 (1985) 4 SCC 628, TMA Pai Foundation and others v.
State of Karnataka (2002) 8 SCC 481, Ram Singh and others v. Union
Territory, Chandigarh and others (2004) 1 SCC 126, etc.


34. We are of the opinion that when we test the meaning of
expression "controlled" which figures in between the words
"body owned" and "substantially financed", the control by the
appropriate government must be a control of a substantial
nature. The mere 'supervision' or 'regulation' as such by a
statute or otherwise of a body would not make that body a

                                                                 Page 8 of 12

      "public authority" within the meaning of 
Section 2(h)(d)(i)
 of the
     RTI Act. In other words just like a body owned or body
     substantially financed by the appropriate government, the
     control of the body by the appropriate government would also be
     substantial and not merely supervisory or regulatory. Powers
     exercised by the Registrar of Cooperative Societies and others under the
     
Cooperative Societies Act
 are only regulatory or supervisory in nature,
     which will not amount to dominating or interfering with the
     management or affairs of the society so as to be controlled.
     Management and control are statutorily conferred on the Management
     Committee or the Board of Directors of the Society by the respective
     
Cooperative Societies Act
 and not on the authorities under the
     
Cooperative Societies Act
.



     35. We are, therefore, of the view that the word "controlled"
     used in 
Section 2(h) (d)(i)
 of the Act has to be understood in the
     context in which it has been used visà-vis a body owned or
     substantially financed by the appropriate government, that is
     the control of the body is of such a degree which amounts to
     substantial control over the management and affairs of the
     body.



SUBSTANTIALLY FINANCED


     36. The words "substantially financed" have been used in 
Sections 2(h)


     (d)(i) & (ii), while defining the expression public authority as well as in
     
Section 2(a)
 of the Act, while defining the expression "appropriate
     Government". A body can be substantially financed, directly or
     indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate Government. The
     expression "substantially financed", as such, has not been defined
     under the Act. "Substantial" means "in a substantial manner so as to
     be substantial". In Palser v. Grimling (1948) 1 All ER 1, 11 (HL), while
     interpreting the provisions of Section 10(1) of the Rent and Mortgage
     Interest Restrictions Act, 1923, the House of Lords held that
     "substantial" is not the same as "not unsubstantial" i.e. just enough to
     avoid the de minimis principle. The word "substantial" literally means
     solid, massive etc. Legislature has used the expression "substantially
     financed" in 
Sections 2(h)(d)(i)
 and (ii) indicating that the degree of
     financing must be actual, existing, positive and real to a substantial
     extent, not moderate, ordinary, tolerable etc.


     37. We often use the expressions "questions of law" and "substantial
     questions of law" and explain that any question of law affecting the
     right of parties would not by itself be a substantial question of law. In
     Black's Law Dictionary (6th Edn.), the word 'substantial' is defined as
     'of real worth and importance; of considerable value; valuable.
     Belonging to substance; actually existing; real: not seeming or
     imaginary; not illusive; solid; true; veritable. Something worthwhile as
     distinguished from something without value or merely nominal.
     Synonymous with material.' The word 'substantially' has been defined
     to mean 'essentially; without material qualification; in the main; in
     substance; materially.' In the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (5th

                                                                     Page 9 of 12

        Edn.), the word 'substantial' means 'of ample or considerable amount of
       size; sizeable, fairly large; having solid worth or value, of real
       significance; sold; weighty; important, worthwhile; of an act, measure
       etc. having force or effect, effective, thorough.' The word 'substantially'
       has been defined to mean 'in substance; as a substantial thing or
       being; essentially, intrinsically.' Therefore the word 'substantial' is not
       synonymous with 'dominant' or 'majority'. It is closer to 'material' or
       'important' or 'of considerable value.' 'Substantially' is closer to
       'essentially'. Both words can signify varying degrees depending on the
       context.



       38. Merely providing subsidiaries, grants, exemptions, privileges
       etc., as such, cannot be said to be providing funding to a
       substantial extent, unless the record shows that the funding
       was so substantial to the body which practically runs by such
       funding and but for such funding, it would struggle to exist. The
       State may also float many schemes generally for the betterment and
       welfare of the cooperative sector like deposit guarantee scheme, scheme
       of assistance from NABARD etc., but those facilities or assistance
       cannot be termed as "substantially financed" by the State Government
       to bring the body within the fold of "public authority" under 
Section 2(h)


       (d)(i) of the Act. But, there are instances, where private educational
       institutions getting ninety five per cent grantin-aid from the appropriate
       government, may answer the definition of public authority under
       
Section 2(h)(d)(i)
....."



In terms of the ratio laid down in the abovementioned judgement it is clear
that FCI (a public authority) exercises substantial control over the affairs of
theC PF Trust as it exercises substantial control in the affairs of the
management of the trust as per the provisions laid down in FCI CPF
Regulations, 1967. The funding provided by the FCI to the CPF Trust is also
substantial in nature as in terms of 
Regulation 12
 of FCI CPF Regulations,
1967 all expenses relating to the administration of the Fund including the pay
and allowances of the staff appointed for the purpose of administering the
Fund shall be borne by the Corporation and shall not be charged to the Fund.



The Commission also refers to a decision of a co-ordinate bench in 
Nihar
Ranjan Das vs Steel Authority of India Ltd., CIC/SAIL1/A/2020/114150

decided on 07.12.2021 which pertained to similar factual matrix. The
Commission in the said matter held that Hindustan Steel Limited
Contributory Provident Fund is a public authority
 u/s 2 (h)
 of the RTI Act,
2005. The relevant extracts of the order are as under:




       9. The Commission, after hearing the submissions of both the parties
       and after perusal of records, observes that the appellant has sought the
       details of investment of HSLCPF Trust and the issues related thereto.

       The Commission further observes that the respondent claimed that the
       HSLCPF Trust is not a public authority as the same functions
       independently without any control of the respondent over it. However
       the respondent failed to appraise the Commission that as to how



                                                                      Page 10 of 12

 HSLCPF Trust does not come under the definition of 
Section 2 (h)
 of the
RTI Act, 2005.



10. It is an admitted fact that the HSLCPF Trust is constituted by the
RSP for the benefit of its employees and the management of their PF
contributions along with the contribution of the employer to function
purely for their interest. Rules and regulations for the management of
this HSLCPF Trust have been framed by the management of the public
authority in consultation of their stake holders and represented through
the trade unions which are also recognized by the public authority.



11. As per the rules of the EPF Trust, functional autonomy has been
provided to the HSLCPF Trust so that it is independent of the
commercial bearing of the public authority. This functional autonomy
envisaged in the rules and regulations made by the public authority
should not be construed as if it is an organization independent of the
public authority and is not a public authority. It is clear that the origin
of the Trust lies in the public authority as it could not have come into
existence on its own without being created by the management of the
RSP. Further the CGM, Finance, is the ex-officio Chairman as per the
rules, which clearly indicates that the HSLCPF Trust comes under the
ambit of 
Section 2(h)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, which reads as under:



....................



14. The Commission observes that HSLCPF Trust came into existence
only by an initiative of the public authority to watch the interest of its
own employees. The rules and regulations of its operations provides an
autonomy from the direct control of the RSP management, yet its
constitution and methods of nomination of trustees is controlled by the
public authority. Since the very purpose of its constitution is to protect
the benefits of its employees/ beneficiaries and to invest their money
for the optimum returns. Hence the Commission finds that the HSLCPF
Trust is an entity which is fully covered under 
section 2(h)(i)
 of the RTI
Act, 2005, as an entity controlled by the public authority. Moreover, a
beneficiary seeking the information about the investments made from
his money into various financial products should not be denied or
rather should be shared with all the beneficiaries' suo-moto as part of
an annual report/ documents prepared by the entity. Hence denial of
information by the HSLCPF Trust is bad in law.



15. In view of the abovementioned ratios, facts & circumstances, the
Commission therefore directs the respondent that if the appellant is
their employees and bonafide beneficiary, the information sought
should be shared with him as per the provisions of the 
RTI Act, 2005
. If
in case the information sought by the appellant has any commercial



                                                               Page 11 of 12

         bearing upon the respondent the same should be denied under the
        relevant provisions of the Act. The abovementioned direction should be
        complied by the respondent within a period of 30 days from the date of
        receipt of this order under the intimation to the Commission.



In the light of the above observations, the Commission is of the view that the
FCI CPF Trust came into existence only by an initiative of the public authority
to watch the interest of its own employees. The rules and regulations of its
operations does not provide FCI CPF Trust autonomy from the direct control
of the FCI management. In addition, its constitution and methods of
nomination of trustees is controlled by the public authority. The issues raised
are also pertaining to the larger public interest of all the beneficiaries since
the very purpose of constitution of the trust is to protect the benefits of its
employees/ beneficiaries and to invest their money for the optimum returns.
Hence the Commission finds that the FCI CPF Trust is an entity which is fully
covered under 
section 2(h)(i)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, as an entity controlled and
substantially financed by the public authority.



The Commission therefore directs the Shri Dewkant Das, CPIO and DGM
(CPF)
to re-examine the RTI application and provide only such information which is
not exempted from disclosure under 
Section 8 (1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 to the
Appellant and also suo motu disclose the same on their website in the interest
of all the beneficiaries and for the sake of transparency and accountability in
the affairs of the CPF Trust.



In the event the information sought is not readily available with him/ her, the
CPIO is also directed to take recourse of 
Section 5 (4)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 to
obtain it from the concerned custodian of records and ensure compliance with
the above direction within 30 days from the date of receipt of this order under
intimation to the Commission.



The instant Second Appeal stands disposed off as such.



                                            Heeralal Samariya (हीरालाल सामरिया)
                               Chief Information Commissioner (मुख्य सूचना आयुक्त)

Authenticated true copy
(अभिप्रमाणित सत्यापित प्रति)

S. K. Chitkara (एस. के . चिटकारा)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26186535





                                                                       Page 12 of 12

                                    Recomendation(s) to PA under 
section 25(5)
 of the RTI Act, 2005:-



                                   Nil




Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)