[Cites 
3
, Cited by 
3
]




Central Information Commission


Vikram Ramakrishnan vs Auroville Foundation on 12 March, 2020


Author: 
Vanaja N Sarna


Bench: 
Vanaja N Sarna


                          क य सच  ु ना आयोग
                   CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION
                            बाबा गंगनाथ माग
                           Baba Gangnath Marg
                       मु नरका, नई द ल - 110067
                       Munirka, New Delhi-110067

                            Decision no.: -CIC/AFOUN/A/2018/636746/03110
                                       File no.: - CIC/AFOUN/A/2018/636746
In the matter of:
Vikram Ramakrishnan
                                                             ... Appellant
                                      VS
Assistant Administrative Officer & CPIO
Auroville Foundation, Auroville Foundation Bhavan,
Auroville, Viluppuram - 605101
                                                              ... Respondent


RTI application filed on          :   26/08/2018
CPIO replied on                   :   26/10/2018
First appeal filed on             :   27/09/2018

First Appellate Authority order   :   Not on record
Second Appeal dated               :   11/12/2018
Date of Hearing                   :   11/03/2020
Date of Decision                  :   11/03/2020

The following were present:

Appellant: Present over VC
Respondent: Pradumna Tiwari, Assistant Administrative Officer & CPIO,
present over VC.



Information Sought:

The appellant has sought the following information:

   1. Auroville Foundation has centres and bank accounts outside India. It is
      also known that Foundation has a Swiss Bank account. Have all these
      been furnished in your returns to the Government of India (GOI)? Who
      is/are operating/authorised signatory's of these overseas bank accounts
      of Auroville Foundation?



                                       1


    2. How many foreign Aurovillians are earning commercial income through
      activities like acting in movies? Provide names of those people who have
      been given permission by Aurovillie Foundation and quantifying their
      income.

   3. How many foreign Aurovillians are registered under Ministry of
      Corporate Affairs? Provide names of those people with copies of their
      DIN.

   4. And other related information.



Grounds for Second Appeal
The CPIO has provided the inaccurate and vague information.



Submissions made by Appellant and Respondent during Hearing:

The appellant submitted that he is not satisfied with the reply of the CPIO as
the desired information was not provided to him. He stated that the Institute is
embroiled in mis-management and corruption, tax evasion, money laundering,
land grabbing and other activities against the Laws of the Union of India.
Further to this, Auroville Foundation and other bodies use the name of
Auroville Foundation to collect donations overseas which are not being
accounted for. Since, Auroville operates very secretively and is in between two
states and all land and assets being vested in the Central Government, it has
gone unchecked for years. He submitted that he himself is a victim of a land
grabbing attack in Auroville, hence not only as a citizen of India, he also has a
locus standi to get the desired information.



The CPIO reiterated the contents of his reply dated 26.10.2018.



Observations:

Having heard the submissions of both the parties and from a perusal of the
relevant case records, it is noted that the reply of the CPIO was highly
improper as the CPIO while denying the requisite information has failed to
claim any exemption under the 
RTI Act
. It is relevant to mention here that in
order to deny information, it is important that the denial should be as per the
provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and also if any of the exemption clauses mentioned
under 
Section 8 (1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 is claimed, the Respondent is required
to provide justification or establish the reason why such exemption was
claimed. Reference is drawn to the decision of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi

                                       2

                                              File no.: - CIC/AFOUN/A/2018/636746

in the matter of 
Dy. Commissioner of Police v. D.K. Sharma, WP (C) No.
 12428
of 2009 dated 15.12.2010, wherein it was held as under:


       "6. This Court is inclined to concur with the view expressed by the CIC
       that in order to deny the information under the 
RTI Act
 the authority
       concerned would have to show a justification with reference to one of
       the specific clauses under 
Section 8 (1)
 of the RTI Act. In the instant
       case, the Petitioner has been unable to discharge that burden. The mere
       fact that a criminal case is pending may not by itself be sufficient unless
       there is a specific power to deny disclosure of the information concerning
       such case."



Under such circumstances, the CPIO is directed to consider the RTI application
afresh and provide a point-wise reply to the appellant. The CPIO should note
that numbers of the foreign Aurovillians as sought by the appellant on points
no. II, III, IV, VI & VII can be provided. On point no. VII, complete information is
to be provided. With regard to the rest of the information sought by the
appellant, the CPIO should examine the queries and the submissions of the
appellant in detail and thereafter should give a categorical reply and in case
the CPIO is claiming any exemption under the 
RTI Act
, the same should be
properly justified.



Decision:

In view of the above, the CPIO is directed to provide a revised reply to the
appellant on all of the points raised in the RTI application within a period of 20
days from the date of receipt of this order under intimation to the
Commission.



A warning is also issued to the CPIO for giving an incomplete reply to the
appellant without justifying the denial of the required information as
mandated under the provisions of the 
RTI Act
.



            The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                Vanaja N. Sarna (वनजा एन. सरना)
                                      Information Commissioner (सच
                                                                 ू ना आय!
                                                                        ु त)

                                         3

 Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत          त)


A.K. Assija (ऐ.के. असीजा)
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक)
011- 26182594 /
 दनांक / Date





                                 4