[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Sunit Malhotra vs Reserve Bank Of India on 7 July, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                            बाबा गंगनाथ माग , मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई  द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/RBIND/A/2021/646227

Mr Sunit Malhotra
(Axis Bank Ltd.)                                   ......अपीलकता /Appellant
                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम
CPIO                                               .... ितवादीगण /Respondent
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Supervision
Central Office, World Trade Centre-1
Cuffe Parade, Colaba, Mumbai-400005

Date of Hearing                   :   23/06/2023
Date of Decision                  :   06/07/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

(Note: The instant appeal has been filed by the third party i.e. Axis Bank Ltd.
aggrieved by an order passed by the FAA, RBI). Proceedings in the matter are
being pursued in pursuance of the following interim decision dated 02.02.2022.

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on          :   06/10/2017
CPIO replied on                   :   26/02/2021
First appeal filed on             :   09/04/2021
First Appellate Authority order   :   18/06/2021
Second Appeal dated               :   06/01/2022




                                        1
 The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case.
hearing both the parties and perusal of records, acceded to the request of the
appellant bank seeking stay on the CPIO's order 26.02.2021 and FAA's order dated
18.06.2021. The appellant is directed to file their written submissions before the
Commission after serving copies thereof upon the respondents within three weeks.
The respondents may also file their counter submissions within three weeks from
date of receipt of the submissions. from the appellant bank. It may be noted that
the matter involves substantial questions of law determination of which require
detailed submissions from parties as well as their presence either in person or
through video conference. In view of this, the operation of the CPIO's order
26.02.2021 and FAA's order dated 18.06.2021shall remain stayed till further
orders. Accordingly, the matter is adjourned.

Information sought
:

The RTI applicant Shri Rajiv Chandok filed an RTI application dated 06.10.2017
seeking the following information:



With regard to the recent amendments in the 
Banking Regulation Act
 1949 where
after 
Section 35AA
 and 
35AB
 have been added after the 
Section 35A
, I have the
following queries under 
Section 35A(1)(a)
:-



1.    Kindly inform the names of all the defaulter companies/Business Entities
      having NPA accounts with Rs.5000 crores or above (PAN INDIA BASIS).

      Kindly inform the value of their NPAs (as of date) of each Party. Please
      provide this information in tabular form bank wise.



2.    In pursuance to the aforesaid amendment, kindly provide the total number
      and names of companies/ Business Entities or Groups having NPA accounts
      that have defaulted in the loan payments to their lender banks and action
      would be PROPOSED by your Office's Internal Advisory Committee (IAC)
      against such defaulters at the National Company Law Tribunal under the
      Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2016.



3.    Kindly inform the name of the defaulter companies which have been
      referred uptil now by your Office to the lender Banks to proceed under the
      provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2016 (IBC) at the National
      Company Law Tribunal.



                                        2


 4.    What is the total value of the NPA's (as of date) of the defaulter companies
      of Shri Vijay Mallaya i.e. the Kingfisher, LIB Group of Companies and their
      allied companies?



5.    Have these companies been added in the aforesaid list of defaulters
      referred uptil now for IBC proceedings at the NCLT? If the answer to the
      aforesaid question is in the negative, then kindly inform the reasons why the
      said defaulter companies have not been directed to be proceeded against
      with?



6.    In case companies of Shri Vijay Mallaya have not been referred by the IAC of
      RBI in the identified 12 defaulter list, kindly explain the reasons why the said
      Committee has not referred the name of Shri Vijay Mallaya's companies.



7.    Kindly provide all the names of the members of the IAC of RBI.



8.    It is learnt from reliable sources that apart from the 12 large accounts that
      IAC RBI has directed banks for proceeding under the IBC 2016, they have
      also referred a list of 26 other big defaulters to be proceeded against with
      at the NCLT benches at 10 locations. Kindly provide the name of the said
      defaulters as well.



In response, the CPIO vide its letter dated 26.02.2021 issued a notice
 u/s. 11(3)
 of
the RTI Act to the Appellant i.e. HDFC Bank Ltd. stating as under:



"Please refer to our letter No.DOS.CO.RIA.No.SK(85/01 .12.OO112O2O-21 (Vot.10)
dated October 23, 2020 wherein we had issued a notice under 
section 11(1)
 read
with 
section 11(2)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005 with respect to captioned
RTI request to enable you to make a written submission as to whether the
information may be disclosed or not along with reasons for exemption from
disclosure under any clause of 
RTI Act, 2005
.

2. After considering your response (dated A211.2020) to the above notice, we
intend to disclose the information on entities having NPA accounts with Rs. 5000
Crores or above (PAN INDIA BASIS) and the value of NPA of each entity and the
bank wise information.

3 Hence a Notice under 
Section 1
 
1(3)
 of the RTI Act,2005 is hereby given apprising
you of the decision taken in the matter."



                                          3


 Being dissatisfied, the Appellant bank through its authorized representative filed a
First Appeal dated 09.04.2021. The FAA vide order dated 18.06.2021 upheld the
reply of CPIO and appeal dismissed accordingly.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Appellant bank approached the
Commission with the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Shri Dharav Shah representative of the Appellant bank present
through Intra Video-Conference.

Respondent: Shri Vinod Kumar, DGM present through Video-Conference.
Original RTI applicant: Present through Intra Video-Conference.



The written submissions of the Appellant bank and the Respondent are taken on
record.



The Representative of the Appellant bank reiterated the contents of their written
submissions, which states as under:



"RBI is under no obligation to collate or look for Information sought for by
Respondent No.2 It is a settled law that when information sought by the RTI
applicant is not part of the public record, or which is not required to be maintained
under any rules, law of public authority, the 
RTI Act
 does not cast an obligation on
RBI to collate or look for information sought. RBI does not maintain the record of
the accounts declared as NPA by the Appellant. Thus, RBI is under no obligation to
create a new record by seeking information from the Appellant and providing the
same to R2.

Central Board of Secondary Education v. Aditya Bandhopadhay, (2011) 8 SCC 497

2. Query made under the 
RTI Act
 must be clear, cogent, and unambiguous It is a
trite law that query made under 
RTI Act
 must be clear, cogent, and unambiguous
and thus a public authority is not bound to provide information which is
ambiguous and lacks clarity. 
Hajinder Dhingra v. State Bank of India
, 2013 SCC
OnLine CIC 3144
Violation of Right to Privacy of the Appellants and its customer The Impugned
Judgement failed to consider the fact that the Information sought by R2 is private
and personal individual information of the Appellant's customers. Thus, disclosure
of the names of client will lead to violation of privacy of the Appellant and its

                                         4

 customers. In any event, the Appellant's customers constitute fourth party(ies) vis-


à-vis R1. Thus, whilst the Appellant had an opportunity to object to the disclosure
of the Information, no such opportunity is being provided to the Appellant's
customers. Thus, the Impugned Judgment was passed in violation of the principles
of natural justice
It is submitted by the Appellant that the Information is held by it in fiduciary
capacity qua its customers. Pertinently, loan related information is part of
"financial results" of the Appellant. Thus, the Information constitutes "unpublished
price sensitive information" which ought not to be disclosed to public at large. 5.
The Impugned Judgement is contrary to the Orders passed by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the HUDCO Matter-facie illegal The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has in
the case of Centre for 
Public Interest Litigation v. Housing & Urban Development
Corporation Limited & Ors. [W.P. (C) No.573/2003
] passed an Order dated
12.04.2016 wherein it inter alia directed that name of the loan defaulters whose
debt is above Rs.500 crores shall be kept in a sealed cover until further orders. It is
submitted that the instant case is squarely covered by the said Order passed in the
HUDCO Matter. Accordingly, no information ought to be disclosed by RI to R2 until
the final outcome of the HUDCO Matter. 6. The confidential nature of the loan
related information is not lost when the accounts are classified as NPA It is
submitted that the Ld. First Appellate Authority failed to appreciate that details of
accounts of its customer is held in fiduciary capacity and trust by the banks"




The Respondent, during the hearing, submitted that the information sought by
the RTI applicant in his RTI application should be disclosed as per Jayantilal Mistry
case.



The RTI applicant submitted that he has sought generic information from the
Reserve Bank of India and the same should be disclosed to him under the 
RTI Act

as per the Jayantilal Mistry case.



Decision:



In the facts of the instant case, it is pertinent to note that a decision of a
coordinate bench of the Commission in the matter of various third-party banks vs.
RBI vide File No. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 covers a
detailed discussion inter alia on the same nature of information sought for from
the RBI and the reliance placed by RBI on the Jayantilal Mistry case. Suffice to say



                                          5

 that the issues raised in the instant case are encapsulated in that same discussion
of the coordinate bench in the following manner:



        "39. A comprehensive view has to be taken on the objection filed by the
institutions. These objectives has to be deliberated and adjudicated in the light of
Jayantilal Mistry's case and other judicial pronouncements relevant in such
matter, some of which have been referred by the Commission in the above parts
as well. The Commission while examining various objections realize that the Writ
Petitions filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is seeking directions of
the Supreme Court for non-disclosure of certain aspects of these audit/inspection
report and any such guidance in these Writ Petitions will have direct bearing and
provide further clarity to the CPIO/FAA in adjudicating various aspects of
disclosure/non-disclosure of reports or the information/data which are part of
these reports under the provisions of the 
RTI Act
. The Commission takes note that
all the cases/second appeals filed herein are based on interpretations of RBI Vs.
Jayantilal Mistry case and other relevant judicial pronouncements requesting for
full disclosure vis-à-vis with exemptions under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act for non-
disclosure of full or parts of these reports.

        40. In view of the above observations, the Commission is of the view that
the reports generated in the hands of regulatory public authority in discharge of
its statutory obligations are information under 
Section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act, as the
regulator and the regulated entities are not governed by fiduciary relationship.

The orders of the Commission to their effect has been upheld by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's case and the position is unchanged even
today. Various objections filed by banks/financial institutions, to be examined,
analyzed and adjudicated upon, are related to various data and information
submitted to the Reserve Bank of India by these financial institutions explaining
their operations, commercial decisions, clients data etc. under statutory
obligations can be disclosed as such. There are apparently two set of such
information which have been shared by the institutions with the regulator under
statutory obligation. First is the information/data of clients relating to their
business/commercial operations, financial transactions, business and commercial
strategy which is shared by clients with financial institutions in full trust and
confidence and is held by them in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure
under the 
RTI Act
 in their hands. Second set is the information relating to business
strategy, decisions, transactions, other operational data etc. of financial
institutions have been bearing on their competitive position which also enjoys the
exemption from disclosure in their hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise,
under the 
RTI Act
. Some of such data, on case to case basis be sensitive enough for

                                         6

 protection of national interest. The Commission is of the view that the protection
of disclosure of information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of
financial institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in
good faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligation. Various
observations of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's case also does not
indicate so and decision of the regulator to consider redacting such
data/information while disclosing the reports is aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts.

       41. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of
the CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care
has to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making
reasoned order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and later
in the hands of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be required to
adjudicate such RTI applications in the light of the observations of the Commission
afresh. The Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various
objections filed by the Banks and Financial Institutions and submissions made by
applicant to reach the decision in favour or against redaction of various parts of
the report on case to case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry case and other relevant judgments, some of
which have been referred in this order as well. Hence, with these observations the
orders passed by the CPIO and FAA in these matters are set aside and the cases
are being remanded to the CPIO for adjudication afresh. (Emphasis Supplied)

       42. It is amply clear that Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and
others tagged are admitted in Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein guidance and
direction has been sought on non-disclosure of certain type of information which
are essentially the part of the Annual Inspection Report/RAR, etc. These petitions
also seek protection of interim communication between regulator and the
regulated entity in the process of finalization of these reports or otherwise. It is
obvious that decision in these Writ Petitions will provide clarity and guidance to
the Public Authority on redaction/non-disclosure of a set of information inspite of
being part of these reports which are open to disclosure. At this stage, any
decision by the Public Authority will amount to pre-judging the issues pending
admitted Writ Petitions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Various banks,
financial institutions, respondent public authority and the RTI applicant have
already impleaded party and are presenting their arguments before the Apex
Court.

       43. Hence, any decision of redaction or disclosure of information, without
waiting for decision in the Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged may cause irrevocable damage against right of privacy and protection of

                                         7

 commercial interest. Hence, the respondent public authority if expedient may
wait for the outcome in Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged or seek clarification from the Hon'ble Court and accordingly decide these
RTI applications by following process as enumerated in the earlier paras by the
Commission in the interest of principles of natural justice. While disclosing the
information they should be cautious in taking a considerate view balancing right
to privacy, protection of national and commercial interest on one hand vis-à-vis
larger public interest. (Emphasis Supplied)

 
44. It is further observed that similar view has also been taken by the
Division Bench of the Commission in file bearing nos. CIC/VS/A/2013/001488 and
CIC/VS/A/2013/001805 dated 11.05.2017 wherein the Commission observed that
'Having considered the submissions of both the parties, the Commission observes
that since a similar issue is pending adjudication before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the matter of Central for 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. &Ors.
, it would be judicious to await the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court. However, on receipt of the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter, the appellant shall be at
liberty to file second appeal afresh, if he so desires. The instant appeals are
disposed of'."




The above decision is therefore applicable to the instant case and no separate line
of adjudication is warranted in the matter. The stipulations contained in File No.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 stands endorsed to the
Respondent CPIO with emphasis on para 41 & 43 supplied as above .



                      The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /

                                        8