[Cites 
16
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Sundaresan vs Department Of Personnel & Training on 25 July, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                            बाबा गंगनाथ माग , मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                         नई  द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File Nos: CIC/DOP&T/A/2022/638377
          CIC/DOP&T/C/2022/639507

Sudaresan                                              ......अपीलकता /Appellant
                                                   ....िशकायतकता /Complainant

                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम
The CPIO,
Lokpal of India
6 Phase-II, Vasant Kunj
Institutional Ara, New Delhi-110070                .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                   :   24/07/2023
Date of Decision                  :   24/07/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

Note: The above referred cases are clubbed for decision as these are based on the
same RTI Application.

Relevant facts emerging from appeal/complaint:

RTI application filed on          :   04/04/2022
CPIO replied on                   :   09/05/2022
First appeal filed on             :   10/05/2022
First Appellate Authority order   :   31/05/2022
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated        :   NIL



                                        1
 Information sought
:

The Appellant/Complainant filed an RTI application dated 04.04.2022 seeking the
following information:-



       "Complaints were made to the Lokpal by email February 2020 after the
evidences were received in January 2020. Lokpal Complaint Rules were applied
retrospectively to suppress my complaints and to aid and abet fraudster and
conspiring MAK servants. Names and designations of persons it) directly applying
retrospectively in respect 'f each of those complaints may be informed Similar
details of the persons responsible to reform ne bf the status of the complaint may
be advised - lull and complete details may be offered to enable me to me a valid
complaint to Lokpal and 'thee complaints.



       Further the annual report of Lokpal for 2019-20 and other years does not
mention the work done of applying Lokpal Complaint Rules retrospectively. The
names and designations of persons responsible to furnish details of my complaints
and to gather details of my complaints and other complaints and to draft and
finalize the said annual report to ensure accountability may also be furnished
similarly."



The CPIO furnished a reply to the appellant/complainant on 09.05.2022 stating as
under:-



       "Please refer to your online RTI Appeal dated 04/04/2022, first of all, the
delay in providing the information is sincerely regretted. Further, with reference to
your RTI application dated 04/04/2022, it is hereby informed that perhaps no action
was taken against your complaints referred in the RTI application, due to shifting of
the office at the relevant time. Moreover, it is also mentioned that no such
instruction was issued by this office to register the complaint on the e-mail i.e.

[email protected]
 . However, as per 
Section 2(e)
 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas
Act, 2013 Complaint' means a complaint, made in such form as may be prescribed.
alleging that a public servant has committed an offense punishable under the

Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
 (49 of 1988) 'Form' for complaint has now been
notified on 0203.2020. It is available on the website of Lokpal of India i.e.
https://lokpal.eov.in with Lokpal (Complaint) Rules 2020. Guidelines for filling the
complaint are also available on the website."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 10.05.2022. FAA's order,
dated 31.05.2022 is as under:-

                                         2


       "Please refer to your RTI application ( Registration No.- LOKPL/R/E/22/00087
dated 04/04/2022) under the 
RTI Act,2005
, received through RTI online portal.



      In this regard, it is intimated that I have gone through the entire records
available and noted that the CPIO & US, Lokpal of India has rightly replied to you
that on your earlier complaints by email in February 2020, no action was taken
against your complaints referred in the said RTI application, perhaps due to
multiplicity/similar complaint. Further, as per our records your two complaints SI.
No. 1112/2019 & 1139/2019 were received and the same was placed before the
Hon'ble Bench of the Lokpal of India and necessary orders were passed therein (copy
enclosed for ready reference).



      3. Further, it may be noted that in order to properly examine the complaints,
the Lokpal (Complaint) Rules,2020 were notified. However, you are advised to file
your complaint still if wants to file, in terms of the provision of the Lokpal
(Complaint) Rules 2020, if yet not teen 's filed by you at the e-mail complaint-to-

[email protected]
 or directly through Lokpal online portal i.e. https://
lokpalonline.gov.in Further, in view of the above facts, no further information could
be furnished. Now ,therefore, the present appeal dated 10.05.2022 is disposed of."



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal & Complaint stating inter alia as under:



       "Originally I was informed by email that my complaints emailed in in Feb
2020 to Lokpal were not considered as the Lokpal Complaint Rules was applied
retrospectively and names of persons responsible for the same and the names and
designations of persons responsible to furnish details of my complaints and to
gather details of my complaints and other complaints and to draft and finalise
annual reports to Parliament of Lokpal to ensure accountability may also be
furnished

       2) Names and other details of the following delinquents were asked for in my
application LOKPL-R-E-22-00087 ( FIRST APPEAL LOKPL-A-E-22-00012 ) ;

       • Who applied the rules retrospectively , And
       • Who was responsible for the annual reports of Lokpal under Sec 48 
Lokpal
Act
 and who failed to report this to Parliament

3) The CPIO came with another version ie ;

       • 3.1 ) the electronic complaints forwarded by email were misplaced on
account of physical shifting
       • 3.2 ) and refused to offer names\

                                         3


        4) This raised a new question - who is responsible for misplacement of
electronic data ? --- (in addition names of those responsible for false entries in
annual report of Lokpal - eg electronic and cloud records missing in physical shifting
of office). In eg CIC/NRAMC/A/2017/605185 attached the CIC also misplaced
records and fabricated false proceedings and false orders to aid and abet
fraudsters.

       5 ) Neither the FAA nor the CPIO mentioned the names which were among
the information asked
       6 ) The letter spirit and provisions and objects of RTIA were wilfully flouted ,
false reports placed before parliament under 
Lokpal Act
 and the names are still not
mentioned .

       7 ) The matter of flouting laws of accountability to Parliament is being flouted
with impunity even by CPIOs and FAAs of Lok and Rajya Sabha secretariats and
these include ;

       • 7.1 ) annual reports under Sec 619A/394 , Companies Acts 1956/2013 since
1956 eg fraud and conspiracies in CPSUS since 1980s , CAG , public servants ,
auditors conspiring with fraudsters and also legal aid Counsels etc
       • 7.2 ) annual reports under Sec 461 
Companies Act
 2013 and its predecessor
act since 1956 eg Satyam Computers , NSEL fraud , MCX fraud , CG Power , DHFL ,
ILFS etc etc
       • 7.3 ) annual reports under 
Securities Contracts Regulations Act
 1956 and

SEBI Act
 eg National Stock exchange colocation etc
       • 7.4 ) Sec 40(5) 
NHB Act
 - DHFL fraud
       • 7.5 ) Sec 25 RTIA • Etc etc etc
       8 ) Even misleading reports are placed before Parliament . and fraud is
perpetrated in RTIA proceedings to enable continued flouting of laws of
accountability..."



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-

Appellant/Complainant: Present through video conference.
Respondent: Prateek Sharma, CPIO present through intra-video conference.



The Appellant/Complainant was heard at length, the sum and substance of his
arguments can be gathered from the grounds of appeal/complaint mentioned
above which was seeking to know the names and designation of officers who were
responsible for applying retrospective effect of the Lokpal Complaint Rules to his
averred email complaints.



                                          4


 The CPIO reiterated the reply provided to the Appellant/Complainant.



Decision:



The Commission based on a perusal of the facts on record observed that the RTI
Application, the issues raised in the Appeal/Complaint reek of vindictive and
interrogative arguments, none of it concerning the mandate of the 
RTI Act
 or the
jurisdiction of the CPIO or that of the FAA or the Commission under the 
RTI Act
. The
Appellant through the channel of 
RTI Act
 is asking the CPIO to justify why no action
was taken on his email complaints and as he was informed in the CPIO's reply about
some shifting of office premises etc., in his Second Appeal and Complaint, the
Appellant/Complainant appears to have resolved to interpret that part of the
CPIO's reply as a fresh issue for consideration by conveying that his email
complaints (electronic data) could not have been misplaced in the office shifting
process. The Commission is therefore not inclined to entertain the said grounds of
complaint/second appeal while the grounds concerning annual reports,
accountability to Parliament etc. are deemed as absolutely extraneous arguments
in the matter.



For better understanding of the mandate of the 
RTI Act
, the Appellant/Complainant
shall note that outstretching the interpretation of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act to
include deductions and inferences to be drawn by the CPIO is unwarranted as it
casts immense pressure on the CPIOs to ensure that they provide the correct
deduction/inference to avoid being subject to penal provisions under the 
RTI Act
.
For the sake of clarity, the provision of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act is reproduced
hereunder:

      "2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--

       (f) "information" means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any
electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be accessed
by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;.."
In this regard, the Appellant/Complainant's attention is drawn towards a judgment
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court on the scope and ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act in
the matter of CBSE vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors.[CIVIL APPEAL NO.6454 of
2011]wherein it washeld as under:



                                         5


 
"35. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some misconceptions about
the 
RTI Act
. 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and
existing.........A public authority is also not required to furnish information which
require drawing of inferences and/or making of assumptions. It is also not
required to provide `advice' or `opinion' to an applicant, nor required to obtain
and furnish any `opinion' or `advice' to an applicant. The reference to `opinion' or
`advice' in the definition of `information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers to
such material available in the records of the public authority. Many public
authorities have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and opinion
to the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused with any
obligation under the 
RTI Act
." (Emphasis Supplied)

Similarly, in the matter of 
Khanapuram Gandaiah vs Administrative Officer &Ors.
[SLP (CIVIL) NO.34868 OF
 2009], the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:




 
"7....Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material which is
not before him; or any information he could have obtained under law.
Under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such information
which can be accessed by the "public authority" under any other law for the time
being in force. The answers sought by the petitioner in the application could not
have been with the public authority nor could he have had access to this information
and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged to give any reasons as to why he had taken
such a decision in the matter which was before him...." (Emphasis Supplied)

And, in the matter of 
Dr. Celsa Pinto, Ex-Officio Joint Secretary,(School Education)
vs. The Goa State Information Commission
 [2008 (110) Bom L R 1238], the Hon'ble
Bombay High Court held as under:




      "..... In the first place, the Commission ought to have noticed that the Act
confers on the citizen the right to information. Information has been defined
by 
Section 2(f)
 as follows.



 
Section 2(f)
 -Information means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any



                                          6

 electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be accessed
by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;

      The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the question why
which would be the same thing as asking the reason for a justification for a
particular thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot expect to
communicate to the citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not done
in the sense of a justification because the citizen makes a requisition about
information. Justifications are matter within the domain of adjudicating
authorities and cannot properly be classified as information." (Emphasis Supplied

Similarly, the Appellant/Complainant is advised about the powers of the
Commission under the 
RTI Act
 by relying on certain precedents of the superior
Courts as under:



The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of 
Hansi Rawat and Anr. v. Punjab
National Bank and Ors. (LPA No.785/2012
) dated 11.01.2013 has held as under:




 
"6. ....proceedings under the 
RTI Act
 cannot be converted into
     proceedings for adjudication of disputes as to the correctness of the
     information furnished."(Emphasis Supplied)

The aforesaid rationale finds resonance in another judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi
High Court in the matter of 
Govt. of NCT of Delhi vs. Rajender Prasad (W.P.[C
]
10676/2016) dated 30.11.2017 wherein it was held as under:




      "6. The CIC has been constituted under 
Section 12
 of the Act and the powers
      of CIC are delineated under the Act. The CIC being a statutory body has to
      act strictly within the confines of the Act and is neither required to nor has
      the jurisdiction to examine any other controversy or disputes."



While, the Apex Court in the matter of 
Union of India vs Namit Sharma (Review
Petition [C] No.2309
 of 2012) dated 03.09.2013 observed as under:




      "20. ...While deciding whether a citizen should or should not get a particular
      information "which is held by or under the control of any public authority",
      the Information Commission does not decide a dispute between two or
      more parties concerning their legal rights other than their right to get
      information in possession of a public authority...." (Emphasis Supplied)


                                         7

 The Appellant/Complainant is therefore advised to exercise his right to information
in an informed and judicious manner in the future. He is further advised to pursue
the grievances before the appropriate forum. The CPIO is also directed to ensure
that the contents of the RTI Application(s) are perused with due diligence in the
future so as to avoid causing unwarranted confusion to the RTI Applicants.



                 The appeal/complaint is dismissed accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )

Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                         8