[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Rahul Dahel vs Chief Commissioner, Central Excise, ... on 11 April, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               के ीयसूचनाआयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/CCEM1/C/2022/664931

Rahul Dahel                                               िशकायतकता /Complainant
                                                        ....िशकायतकता 

                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम

CPIO,
Office of the Commissioner GST & CX,
Bhiwandi, RTI Cell, Lotus Info Centre,
12th Floor, Station Road, Parel (E),
Mumbai - 400012, Maharashtra.                            .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                     :   06/04/2023
Date of Decision                    :   06/04/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :               Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from complaint:

RTI application filed on            :   10/11/2022
CPIO replied on                     :   29/11/2022
First appeal filed on               :   Not on record
First Appellate Authority's order   :   Not on record
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated          :   04/12/2022


Information sought
:

The Complainant filed an RTI application dated 10.11.2022 seeking the following
information:



"Please provide the reasons or grounds for the Termination of Services of Sh.Rahul
Dahel, Inspector, CGST&CEX, Div-1, Bhiwandi Commissionerate vide order

                                           1

 F.No.Il/Vig/Bhiwandi/RD/65/2022 dated 28.10.2022 issued by the Commissioner,
CGST and CEX, Bhiwandi Commissionerate, Mumbai zone, Mumbai."



The CPIO furnished a reply to the complainant on 29.11.2022 stating as under:-



       "In this connection, it is to state that in the form Shri Rahul Dahel has stated
that it is Normal Application, whereas in the remarks it is stated that it affects the
life and liberty of a person. Hence the application are treated as "NORMAL"

Application.



      It is to state that the information he has called is exempted from disclosure
under section 8(1)(h) of the Act and hence information called for cannot be
provided."



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, complainant approached the Commission with
the instant Complaint.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Complainant: Present through video conference.

Respondent(s): Alok Garg, Assistant Commissioner & Rep. of CPIO, O/o the
Commissioner of GST & CX(Mumbai) present through video conference.



The Complainant stated that the denial of the information by the CPIO is not
comprehensible to him when there is no investigation against him or any inquiry
pending against him. Rather, he has been removed from service without giving
any notice or reasons, pushing him and his family to a state of destitution, which
is why he has sought for the averred reasons and he is entitled to these reasons
as per the mandate of 
Section 4(1)(d)
 of the RTI Act.



The Rep. of CPIO relied on the contents of the written submissions dated
30.03.2023 filed by the CPIO stating as under:



        "6. Para wise comments for the applicant's complaint :

        xxx

        2 to 6. It was seen that the information was filed as normal application, but
the applicant had mentioned in the application that the same is concerned with
life or personal liberty of a person. The claim of the applicant was examined in the
light of the guidelines laid down by the Central Information Commission that "Life

                                          2

 or Liberty proviso to be applied only in exceptional cases", and in the instant case,
the applicant has not established that in case of non-supply of information, he will
be deprived of his life or liberty or that there is an imminent danger to his life or
liberty. Hence, his application was treated as Normal Application.

       7 to 8. It is further submitted that the information sought for was relating to
the reasons or grounds for termination of his services. In this connection, it is
submitted that the applicant was employed in this office as Inspector, and was
under probation period, during which the Competent Authority terminated his
services without assigning any reasons as per terms & conditions of the Offer of
Appointment Letter. Further, he has filed an Original Application in Central
Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Mumbai against the Order of Termination. The
instant matter was pending in Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), the same has
not attained finality, and hence the information sought for was denied U/ s 8(1)(h)
of 
RTI Act, 2005
. It is further submitted that the CPIO has not mentioned anything
related to investigation or prosecution of offenders in the reply, as alleged by the
appellant.

 
It is further submitted that information sought for relates to service matter,
and the above reply of the CPIO is in line with the decision made by Hon'ble CIC in
the case of 
Rajeev Srivastava v Directorate of Defense Estates
,
No.CIC/AT/A/2006/00610.




       7. It is brought to the kind notice of the Central Information Commission
that the denial of information was on reasonable grounds as explained above, and
not with any malafide intention whatsoever.

       8. In view of the above, submissions, it is brought to the kind notice of the
Central Information Commission that the denial of information was on reasonable
grounds as explained above, and not with any malafide intention whatsoever.
Therefore, the prayer of the applicant for penalty and disciplinary action against
the CPIO is devoid of merits.

       9. It is further submitted that the applicant had also filed ten applications
seeking the same information and four appeals with First Appellate Authority
within a period of 5 months, which were also replied as required, resulting in
departmental officers diverting more time and manpower in replying to the
applications. Further, he has not attended any of the personal hearing granted to
him by the FAA."



Decision

The Commission observes from a perusal of the facts on record that the sum and
substance of the CPIO's justification for invoking 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act is a

                                          3

 case of the Complainant sub judice in CAT related to his termination. Sub judice is
not an exemption prescribed under the provisions of the 
RTI Act
. Besides, 
Section
8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act provides for exemption of information when disclosure
impedes an investigation or prosecution or apprehension of offenders, while the
facts placed on record do not refer to either of the three considerations to allow
determination of the merits of 
Section 8(1)(h)
. The CPIO appears to have grossly
misinterpreted and misplaced the exemption of 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act. For
the sake of clarity, 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of the RTI Act is reproduced here:



     "(h) information which would impede the process of investigation or
apprehension or prosecution of offenders;"



Here, to add perspective to the above observations of the Commission with
respect to the claim of 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of the Act, the attention of the CPIO is
drawn towards a judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the matter of

Bhagat Singh vs Chief Information Commissioner
, 146 (2008) DLT 385, wherein the
following was held:




       "13. Access to information, under 
Section 3
 of the Act, is the rule and
exemptions under 
Section 8
, the exception. 
Section 8
 being a restriction on this
fundamental right, must therefore is to be strictly construed. It should not be
interpreted in manner as to shadow the very right itself. Under 
Section 8
,
exemption from releasing information is granted if it would impede the process of
investigation or the prosecution of the offenders. It is apparent that the mere
existence of an investigation process cannot be a ground for refusal of the
information; the authority withholding information must show satisfactory
reasons as to why the release of such information would hamper the investigation
process. Such reasons should be germane, and the opinion of the process being
hampered should be reasonable and based on some material. Sans this
consideration, 
Section 8(1)(h)
 and other such provisions would become the haven
for dodging demands for information."



Similarly, on the aspect of sub judice, the attention of the CPIO is drawn towards
a judgment of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of 
Municipal
Corporation of Delhi v. R.K. Jain W.P. (C
) 14120/ 2009 dated 23.09.2010 wherein it
was held as under:




      "5...........The matter being sub judice before a court is not one of the
categories of information which is exempt from disclosure under any of the
clauses of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act."

                                         4


 Clearly, in the instant case, there is no "investigation" to begin with and therefore
the question of the corollaries i.e "prosecution" or "apprehension" does not even
arise and therefore, the invocation of 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of the Act was erroneous.



Nonetheless, keeping in view the submissions of the CPIO, the Commission is
unable to accord any malafides to the said wrong denial of the information and
therefore is not inclined to take any adverse action under 
Section 20
 of the RTI
Act. 
In this regard, attention of the Complainant is drawn towards a judgment of
the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the matter of 
Registrar of Companies & Ors v.
Dharmendra Kumar Garg & Anr
. [W.P.(C) 11271/2009] dated 01.06.2012 wherein
it was held:




       "61. It can happen that the PIO may genuinely and bonafidely entertain the
belief and hold the view that the information sought by the querist cannot be
provided for one or the other reasons. Merely because the CIC eventually finds
that the view taken by the PIO was not correct, it cannot automatically lead to
issuance of a showcause notice under 
Section 20
 of the RTI Act and the imposition
of penalty. The legislature has cautiously provided that only in cases of malafides
or unreasonable conduct, i.e., where the PIO, without reasonable cause refuses to
receive the application, or provide the information, or knowingly gives incorrect,
incomplete or misleading information or destroys the information, that the
personal penalty on the PIO can be imposed...."



Another aspect of the case is that in a strict sense the Complainant has not sought
for any specific record/information rather has sought for answers to an
interrogative query and therefore the RTI Application is not as per 
Section 2(f)
 of
the RTI Act. Yet, the written submissions of the CPIO provide for an answer that
the termination was as per the terms and conditions of the offer of
appointment letter. Besides, the Complainant has pursued the matter before the
competent authorities and therefore he is advised to await the outcome of the
same. For the sake of clarity, the provision of 
Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act is
reproduced hereunder:



      "2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--

      (f) "information" means any material in any form, including records,
documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders,
logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any


                                         5

 electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be
accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;.."

In this regard, the Complainant's attention is drawn towards a judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court on the scope and ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act in the
matter of CBSE vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors.[CIVIL APPEAL NO.6454 of
2011]wherein it washeld as under:



 
"35. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some misconceptions about
the 
RTI Act
. 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is available and
existing.........A public authority is also not required to furnish information which
require drawing of inferences and/or making of assumptions. It is also not
required to provide `advice' or `opinion' to an applicant, nor required to obtain
and furnish any `opinion' or `advice' to an applicant. The reference to `opinion'
or `advice' in the definition of `information' in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers
to such material available in the records of the public authority. Many public
authorities have, as a public relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and
opinion to the citizens. But that is purely voluntary and should not be confused
with any obligation under the 
RTI Act
." (Emphasis Supplied)

Similarly, in the matter of 
Khanapuram Gandaiah vs Administrative Officer &Ors.
[SLP (CIVIL) NO.34868 OF
 2009], the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:




      "7....Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material which is
not before him; or any information he could have obtained under law.
Under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only such information
which can be accessed by the "public authority" under any other law for the time
being in force. The answers sought by the petitioner in the application could not
have been with the public authority nor could he have had access to this
information and Respondent No. 4 was not obliged to give any reasons as to
why he had taken such a decision in the matter which was before him...."

(Emphasis Supplied)

And, in the matter of 
Dr. Celsa Pinto, Ex-Officio Joint Secretary,(School
Education) vs. The Goa State Information Commission
 [2008 (110) Bom L R
1238], the Hon'ble Bombay High Court held as under:




                                          6


       "..... The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the question
why which would be the same thing as asking the reason for a justification for a
particular thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot expect to
communicate to the citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not done
in the sense of a justification because the citizen makes a requisition about
information. Justifications are matter within the domain of adjudicating
authorities and cannot properly be classified as information." (Emphasis
Supplied
The CPIO is however strictly advised to acquaint themselves well with the
provisions of the 
RTI Act
 before dealing with RTI matters in the future and to
desist from invoking the exemption clauses without any apparent applicability.
Further, the CPIO is directed to send a copy of the written submissions dated
30.03.2023 to the Complainant (in consonance with para 4 of the notice of
hearing) immediately upon receipt of order.



                   The Complaint is disposed of accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani(सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                 सूचना आयु )
                                       Information Commissioner (सू
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणतस यािपत ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ,उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक / Date





                                       7