[Cites 
19
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Priti Ranjan Dash (Hdfc Bank) vs Reserve Bank Of India on 13 May, 2022


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                            के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                     Central Information Commission
                        बाबा गंगनाथ माग,मुिनरका
                      Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                      नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या/Second Appeal No. CIC/RBIND/A/2018/172175

HDFC Bank Limited                                       ... अपीलकता/Appellant
through Priti Ranjan Dash
                                   VERSUS
                                    बनाम
CPIO                                                     ... ितवादी/Respondent
Reserve Bank of India
Department of Banking Supervision,
Central Office, 2nd Floor, Centre-1,
Cuffe Parade, Colaba, Mumbai-400005

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal:-

RTI : 01-04-2018            FA    : 25-07-2018         SA       : 12-12-2018

CPIO : 03-05-2018           FAO : 07-09-2018           Hearing : 22-04-2022

                                 ORDER

1.    The original RTI applicant Shri Ashok Roy filed an application under the

Right to Information Act, 2005
 
(RTI Act
) before the Central Public Information
Officer (CPIO), Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai. The applicant seeking
information is as under:-



                                                                    Page 1 of 11


 2.     The CPIO vide letter dated 03-05-2018 reply is as under "Since the
information sought by the applicant related to your bank, a notice is therefore
given under 
section 11(1)
 read with 
section 11(2)
 of the Right to information
Act, 2005 to enable you to make a written submission within ten days from the
date of receipt of this notice as to whether the documents sought by the
applicant may be disclosed or not along with reasons for the same indicating
clarity, for each of the documents, whether the information sought for by
applicant is eligible for exemption under any clause of 
RTI Act, 2005
. Being
dissatisfied with the same, the appellant has file first appeal dated 25-07-2018
and requested that the information should be provided to him. The FAO vide
letter dated 07-09-2018 upheld CPIOs reply and dismissed the appeal. He has
filed a second appeal before the Commission on the ground that the order of the
FAA should be set-aside.



Hearing:



3.    The appellant was represented through counsel Shri Ayush Gandhi who
attended the hearing through video-conferencing. The respondent, Shri Abhay
Kumar, General Manager & CPIO along with Shri Dayanand Gund, Assistant


                                                                      Page 2 of 11

 Legal Advisor attended the hearing through video-conferencing. The original
RTI applicant Shri Ashok Roy was not present despite notice.

4.     The written submissions of the parties are taken on record.

5.     The counsel for the HDFC Bank Ltd. submitted that they have filed the
present Second Appeal challenging the Order dated 7th September 2018 issued
by the First Appellate Authority, Reserve Bank of India as the First Appellate
Authority has passed the Impugned Order without giving any opportunity of
being heard to the Appellant and has inter alia failed to appreciate that the
disclosure of the information sought to be disclosed is exempt under 
Section 8

of the Right to Information Act, 2005, more particularly 
Section 8(1)(h)
 since
the FMR Report No. HDFC 1601-0070 dated 11th March 2016 pertains to fraud
committed by certain employees of the Appellant, including the concerned
Applicant Shri Ashok Roy, in the Bhagalpur Branch of the Appellant Bank, and
which was detected during a branch audit and the investigation in that regard is
still pending. Information sought by the Applicant pertains to a pending
investigation and therefore the same is exempt under 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of the Act.
He further submitted that accordingly, the Appellant bank had also made a
complaint with Kotwali/ Patna Police Station vide GD No.1143 dated 29th July
2019. Further, the Appellant has also filed a Complaint, being Complaint
No.3582 of 2018 with the Ld. Chief Judicial Magistrate, Patna. Vide its order
dated 23rd August 2018 the Ld. Magistrate, under
 S.156(3)
 of the Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973, has directed the Kotwali/ Patna Police to investigate the
matter. The investigation, therefore, in the matter is still pending. The Applicant
herein, was one of the perpetrators of the fraud which is under investigation.
Disclosure of the information sought by the Applicant it is real and likely
apprehension that the Applicant will impede the process of the investigation
and/ or the process of prosecution. The information sought and intended to be
disclosed is therefore exempt under 
Section 8(1)(h)
 of the Act. Further, the First
Appellate Authority has failed to appreciate that the informationcorrespondence
in compliance of fraud reporting provided by the banks is held by the RBI in a
fiduciary capacity, and is therefore, exempt from disclosure under 
section 8(e)

of the Act.

6.     The respondent, CPIO, Reserve Bank of India submitted that disclosure
of correspondence, including responses from HDFC Bank during the review of
FMR, the CPIO, vide letter dated 03.05.2018, issued notice under 
Section 11(1)

of the RTI Act, 2005 to HDFC Bank Ltd. After considering the response from
HDFC Bank, the CPIO, vide letter dated 25.06.2018 issued under 
Section 11(3)

of the RTI Act, 2005 informed the decision to disclose the information
regarding HDFC Bank's email dated 23.11.2016 (excluding attachments),

                                                                        Page 3 of 11

 30.11.2016 (excluding attachments), 17.01.2017 and 16 06 2017 (excluding
attachments) to the applicant after severing the information which was
considered exempt from disclosure under 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act, 2005. The
respondent further submitted that aggrieved by the letter dated 25.06.2018
issued by the Reserve Bank in exercise of the powers under 
Section 11(3)
, the
appellant preferred an appeal under 
section 19
 of the RTI Act before the First
Appellate Authority (FAA). In the appeal, appellant contended that the
information is exempt from disclosure under 
Section 8
 of the RTI Act, 2005.
However, the FAA had also upheld the reply given by the CPIO. The appellant
has also contended that the information/ correspondence in compliance of fraud
reporting provided by the banks is held by the RBI in a fiduciary capacity, and
is therefore, exempt from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(e)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.
The respondent submitted that the Supreme Court in 
Reserve Bank of India v.
Jayantilal N Mistry & Ors.
 (AIR 2016 SC 1 (2016) 3 SCC 525), referred to the
Reserve Bank's stand on confidentiality provisions under various statutory
enactments. As regards the kind of information contained in AFI/scrutiny
reports or related documents, etc. for which exemption from disclosure was
claimed by the Reserve Bank under clauses (a), (d) and (e) of 
Section 8(1)
 of
the RTI Act, 2005, the Supreme Court has specifically held that since such
information is provided to the Reserve Bank under mandate of law, the claim of
exemption is not sustainable.
 
The following observation of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in 
Reserve Bank of India & Ors. v. Jayantilal N. Mistry & Ors.
, (2016) 3
SCC 525 is pertinent in this regard: "RBI is supposed to uphold public interest
and not the interest of individual banks. RBI is clearly not in any fiduciary
relationship with any bank RBI has no legal duty to maximize the benefit of any
public sector or private sector bank, and thus there is no relationship of trust'
between them, RBI has a statutory duty to uphold the interest of the public at
large, the depositors, the country's economy and the banking sector. Thus, RBI
ought to act with transparency and not hide information that might embarrass
individual banks. It is duty bound to comply with the provisions of the 
RTI Act

and disclose the information sought by the respondents herein".




Decision:

7.     The Commission, after hearing the submissions of both the parties and
after perusal of records, observes that the RTI applicant Shri Ashok Roy had
sought information regarding "Please share the FMR copy and FMR-3 quartely
updates for quarter ended September 2016; please share the police FIR details
as informed to you; please share the correspondences including response by
HDFC Bank, if any, made between Reserve Bank of India during the review of

                                                                       Page 4 of 11

 FMR, etc." The CPIO, Reserve Bank of India had issued notice under 
Section
11(1)
 and 
11(3)
 to the bank only in respect to point no. 8 of the RTI application
mentioned above intending to disclose the information. Aggrieved by the
decision of the CPIO, the said bank had filed first appeal with the First
Appellate Authority. But the FAA had also dismissed the first appeal of the
bank summarily. Being aggrieved with the order of the FAA, bank had filed
second appeal before this Commission.

8.      The Commission takes note of the submissions made by the Bank that
large amount of data relating to its clients including their identity,
correspondences with regulator, penalties imposed on them, business plans,
decisions and financial transactions as well as institutional business plans etc. of
bank is shared with the regulator, without any redaction or withholding the
information, in good faith that these will be objectively analysed in discharge of
their statutory obligations to make fair judgment on their functioning without
affecting their competitive position. To this extent, there is an element of trust
and confidence in sharing the data, both financial and operational, between the
RBI and the bank. The information and data of the clients in the hands of Bank
also has the element of trust and confidence that such data will not be disclosed
or shared against their right to privacy/commercial interest.

9.      The Commission further takes note of the FAA's order referring to the

Jayantilal Mistry
's case upholding the decision of CPIO. The ratio of 
the said
judgment
 is that annual inspection report/audit reports of bank generated in the
hands of Reserve Bank of India as regulator does not enjoy protection under

Section 8(1)(e)
 of the RTI Act and the relationship between RBI and financial
institutions to that extent cannot be termed as 'fiduciary'. For various issues
involving right to privacy or protection of commercial interests Hon'ble
Supreme Court and High Courts have passed orders amply clarifying disclosure
of such matters under the provisions of 
RTI Act
 and exemption under 
Section
8(1)
 of the Act.


10. Keeping in view the broader nature of business carried out between a
customer and the bank, the Commission takes note of the observations passed
by the Supreme Court in 
Central Board Of Sec. Education & Anr. vs Aditya
Bandopadhyay & Ors
 [2011 (8) SCC 497] vide order dated 09.08.2011
examined and explained the expression 'fiduciary relationship', and have
illustrated a few relationships where parties were involved in an act of fiduciary
capacity including 'customers' in the following words:


        "20. The term `fiduciary' and `fiduciary relationship' refer to different
        capacities and relationship, involving a common duty or obligation. 20.1)



                                                                         Page 5 of 11

       Black's Law Dictionary (7th Edition, Page 640) defines `fiduciary
      relationship' thus:



      A relationship in which one person is under a duty to act for the benefit of
      the other on matters within the scope of the relationship. Fiduciary
      relationships - such as trustee-beneficiary, guardian-ward, agent-
      principal, and attorney-client - require the highest duty of care. Fiduciary
      relationships usually arise in one of four situations : (1) when one person
      places trust in the faithful integrity of another, who as a result gains
      superiority or influence over the first, (2) when one person assumes
      control and responsibility over another, (3) when one person has a duty
      to act for or give advice to another on matters falling within the scope of
      the relationship, or (4) when there is a specific relationship that has
      traditionally been recognized as involving fiduciary duties, as with a
      lawyer and a client or a stockbroker and a customer."



      "39. The term "fiduciary" refers to a person having a duty to act for the
      benefit of another, showing good faith and candour, where such other
      person reposes trust and special confidence in the person owing or
      discharging the duty. The term "fiduciary relationship" is used to
      describe a situation or transaction where one person (beneficiary) places
      complete confidence in another person (fiduciary) in regard to his affairs,
      business or transaction(s). The term also refers to a person who holds a
      thing in trust for another (beneficiary). The fiduciary is expected to act in
      confidence and for the benefit and advantage of the beneficiary, and use
      good faith and fairness in dealing with the beneficiary or the things
      belonging to the beneficiary. If the beneficiary has entrusted anything to
      the fiduciary, to hold the thing in trust or to execute certain acts in regard
      to or with reference to the entrusted thing, the fiduciary has to act in
      confidence and is expected not to disclose the thing or information to any
      third party."



While taking into consideration the fact that the customers give their financial
information to the banks in confidence and with complete faith that may not be
divulged as a result of disclosure by others, the following observations passed
by the Supreme in Court 
Bihar Public Service Commission v. Saiyed Hussain
Abbas Rizwi and Anr.
 [ (2012) 13 SCC 61] may be relied upon:




      "The satisfaction has to be arrived at by the authorities objectively and
      the "consequences of such disclosure have to be weighed with regard to
      the circumstances of a given case. The decision has to be based on

                                                                         Page 6 of 11

       objective satisfaction recorded for ensuring that larger public interest
      outweighs unwarranted invasion of privacy or other factors stated in the
      provision. Certain matters, particularly in relation to appointment, are
      required to be dealt with great confidentiality. The information may come
      to knowledge of the authority as a result of disclosure by others who give
      that information in confidence and with complete faith, integrity and
      fidelity. Secrecy of such information shall be maintained, thus, bringing it
      within the ambit of fiduciary capacity. Similarly, there may be cases
      where the disclosure has no relationship to any public activity or interest
      or it may even cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of the individual.
      All these protections have to be given their due implementation as they
      spring from statutory exemptions. It is not a decision simpliciter between
      private interest and public interest. It is a matter where a constitutional
      protection is available to a person with regard to the right to privacy.
      Thus, the public interest has to be construed while keeping in mind the
      balance factor between right to privacy and right to information with the
      purpose sought to be achieved and the purpose that would be served in
      the larger public interest, particularly when both these rights emerge
      from the constitutional values under the Constitution of India."

Further, in 
Naresh Trehan vs Rakesh Kumar Gupta [W.P.(C
) 85/2010 & CM
Nos.156/2010 & 5560/2011], the Delhi High Court made the following
observations:




      "...It is, thus, essential that information relating to business affairs,
      which is considered to be confidential by an assessee must remain so,
      unless it is necessary in larger public interest to disclose the same. If the
      nature of information is such that disclosure of which may have the
      propensity of harming one's competitive interests, it would not be
      necessary to specifically show as to how disclosure of such information
      would, in fact, harm the competitive interest of a third party. In order to
      test the applicability of 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the Act it is necessary to first
      and foremost determine the nature of information and if the nature of
      information is confidential information relating to the affairs of a private
      entity that is not obliged to be placed in public domain, then it is
      necessary to consider whether its disclosure can possibly have an adverse
      effect on third parties."



 
The Supreme Court while deciding upon issues relating to personal
information of an individual in terms of his income tax returns passed the


                                                                        Page 7 of 11

 following observations in 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande v. Central
Information Commr.
 [(2013) 1 SCC 212] :




      "12. The petitioner herein sought for copies of all memos, show-cause
      notices and censure/punishment awarded to the third respondent from his
      employer and also details viz. movable and immovable properties and
      also the details of his investments, lending and borrowing from banks and
      other financial institutions. Further, he has also sought for the details of
      gifts stated to have been accepted by the third respondent, his family
      members and friends and relatives at the marriage of his son. The
      information mostly sought for finds a place in the income tax returns of
      the third respondent. The question that has come up for consideration is:

      whether the abovementioned information sought for qualifies to be
      "personal information" as defined in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI
      Act.



      13. We are in agreement with the CIC and the courts below that the
      details called for by the petitioner i.e. copies of all memos issued to
      the third respondent, show cause notices and orders of
      censure/punishment etc. are qualified to be personal information as
      defined in clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act. The performance
      of an employee/officer in an organization is primarily a matter
      between the employee and the employer and normally those aspects
      are governed by the service rules which fall under the expression
      "personal information", the disclosure of which has no relationship
      to any public activity or public interest. On the other hand, the
      disclosure of which would cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of
      that individual. Of course, in a given case, if the Central Public
      Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer of the
      Appellate Authority is satisfied that the larger public interest
      justifies the disclosure of such information, appropriate orders
      could be passed but the petitioner cannot claim those details as a
      matter of right.

      14. The details disclosed by a person in his income tax returns are
      "personal information" which stand exempted from disclosure under
      clause (j) of 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, unless involves a larger
      public interest and the Central Public Information Officer or the
      State Public Information Officer or the Appellate Authority is
      satisfied that the larger public interest justifies the disclosure of
      such information."

      The aforementioned observations make it clear that the data has been
shared by the individuals with the Income Tax Department which is seeking
such information as an statutory authority but while analyzing and assessing

                                                                       Page 8 of 11

 their income keeps this data secure in the fiduciary capacity and hence it is
protected from disclosure. It is applicable not only for individuals but for other
legal entities recognizable under 
Income Tax Act
. Further, it has been observed
that the information in the hands of public authority even in the discharge of
statutory obligations is protected under fiduciary relationship.

11. There are apparently two set of such information which have been shared
by the bank with the regulator under statutory obligation. First is the
information/data of clients relating to their business/commercial operations,
financial transactions, business and commercial strategy which is shared by
clients with financial institutions in full trust and confidence and is held by them
in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure under the 
RTI Act
 in their
hands. Second set is the information relating to business strategy, decisions,
transactions, other operational data etc. of financial institution which may have
bearing on their competitive position and also enjoys the exemption from
disclosure in their hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise, under the 
RTI
Act
. The Commission is of the view that the exemption of disclosure of certain
information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of financial
institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in good
faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligations. This aspect is not
the ratio of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jayantilal Mistry's judgment and
decision of the regulator to consider redacting such data/information while
disclosing the reports is to be aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts covering such aspects.

12. The Commission has also taken a detailed view in file nos.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 & Ors. dated 05.05.2022 wherein issues of
redaction, ratio of 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case and other related issues are discussed
in detail. Perusal of the relevant paragraphs in Jayantilal Mistry judgment make
it clear that the fundamental rights enshrined upon the citizens in form of right
to information are not absolute and that the right to information may not draw
precedence over right to privacy. Therefore, the Courts need to strike a balance
between the rights as well as protections guaranteed to a citizen under 
Article 19

of the Constitution. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held that the disclosure
of information relating to banks and financial institutions may be allowed taking
into account the circumstances and nature of information sought for and not in a
blanket manner. The Commission advised the CPIO to consider taking the
relevant references from the said order while deciding the cases.


13. The Commission further observes that the CPIO while issuing notice
under 
Section 11
 of the RTI Act has given the opportunity to the bank to seek
their objections, if any, against disclosure of information w.r.t point no. 8 of the

                                                                         Page 9 of 11

 RTI application but has not found it necessary to give them an opportunity of
hearing. The CPIO has not passed any reasoned order covering his deliberation
on their objections, his understanding of law or jurisprudence in rejecting
specific objections in favor of disclosure or redaction etc. Orders passed by the
CPIO is cryptic and without any reference to objections raised by the Bank.
Similarly, the FAA instead of passing a speaking order have given a cryptic and
vague reply to the appellant bank. The CPIO and the FAA have visibly not
applied their mind before issuing the order of intent of disclosing the
information. The conduct of the CPIO and FAA is not in line with the
provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and principles of natural justice. Further, no
opportunity of hearing was given to the appellant bank in order to enable them
to make their submissions nor speaking order have been passed by FAA for not
giving such opportunity of hearing or elaborating reasons for accepting /not
accepting their objections. The Commission is of the view that objections
should be specifically dealt and rejected/accepted with reasons. Further, the
order of CPIO and FAA have been passed without any opportunity of hearing to
the appellant but the orders so passed do not reflect deliberation and
understanding of points raised by the appellant not requiring any personal
hearing. There is nothing on record which shows that the CPIO has given point-
wise reply to the original RTI applicant on his RTI application beside point no.

8.

14. The Commission is of the view that opportunity of hearing should
necessarily be provided and orders passed by the CPIO and the FAA should be
reasoned, speaking and clear. In view of the above, the Commission directs the
CPIO, Reserve Bank of India to re-examine the RTI application of the original
RTI applicant in the light of the observations of the Commission afresh. The
Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various objections
filed by the Bank and submissions made by applicant to reach the decision in
favour or against redaction of various parts of the information sought. He has to
factor the observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case and
other relevant judgments, some of which have been referred in this order as
well. Hence, with these observations the orders passed by the CPIO and FAA in
these matters are set aside and the case is being remanded to the CPIO for
adjudication afresh. The above directions of the Commission should be
complied within a period of 30 days from the date of receipt of this order. In
case, the appellant/applicant is aggrieved with the order of the CPIO, they are at
the liberty to file first appeal before the First Appellate Authority and afterwards
second appeal before the Commission.


15. With the above observations, the appeal is disposed of.

                                                                        Page 10 of 11


 16.   Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.




                                                           नीरज कु मार गु ा)
                                       Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरज           ा
                                                               सूचना आयु )
                                     Information Commissioner (सू

                                                        दनांक / Date : 12.05.2022
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)


S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),
(011-26105682)



Addresses of the parties:
1.   CPIO
     Reserve Bank of India
     Department of Banking Supervision,
     Central Office, 2nd Floor, Centre-1,
     Cuffe Parade, Colaba, Mumbai-400005

2.    HDFC Bank Limtied

3.    Mr. Ashok Roy (Original Appellant)





                                                                      Page 11 of 11