[Cites 
13
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Dharmvir vs Delhi Development Authority on 4 March, 2020


                                       के ीय सूचना आयोग
                             Central Information Commission
                                   बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                              Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                                नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या / Second Appeal No.:- CIC/DDATY/A/2018/147431-BJ

Mr. Dharamvir
                                                                         ....अपीलकता/Appellant
                                           VERSUS
                                            बनाम

CPIO
PIO, Circle - 17, DDA
Office of the Executive Engineer
Lakkad Mandi, Kirti Nagar
New Delhi - 110055
                                                                     ... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing       :                     03.03.2020
Date of Decision      :                     04.03.2020

Date of RTI application                                                    12.06.2018
CPIO's response                                                            27.06.2018
Date of the First Appeal                                                   05.07.2018
First Appellate Authority's response                                       12.07.2018
Date of diarised receipt of Appeal by the Commission                       30.07.2018

                                          ORDER

FACTS:

The Appellant vide his RTI application sought information on 10 points in respect of work of
Development of land in Dwarka Construction of Boundary wall drain no. 2, Sector 23 Dwarka of
23B, 24, 25, 26 Dwarka Zone, the copies of all pages of Cement Register/copy of Cement
Bills/Copy of Drawing, etc.

The CPIO, vide its letter dated 27.06.2018 stated that the matter is sub-judice with the Hon'ble
Court and that the information would only be provided after receiving directions from the Court.
Dissatisfied with the CPIO's response, the Appellant approached the FAA. The FAA, vide its
order dated 12.07.2018 while upholding the CPIO's response, stated that the Appellant could
request the Hon'ble Court for the requisite documents.



HEARING:

Facts emerging during the hearing:

The following were present:

                                                                                     Page 1 of 5


 Appellant: Mr. Dharamvir along with Mr. G. L. Verma;

Respondent: Absent;



The Respondent remained absent during the hearing, despite prior intimation. The Appellant
reiterated the contents of the RTI application and stated that the information sought was not
provided to him, till date. Moreover, the exemption claimed by the Respondent that the matter is
sub-judice could not be the ground for denial of information. The Appellant further alleged
corruption and malpractices within the Respondent Public Authority in respect of construction of
boundary wall and that to unearth such wrongdoings he desired to have the requisite information.
Furthermore, the Appellant submitted that mere sub-judice could not be the ground for denial as
the Respondent had to justify how the disclosure of information would impede the court case.
Moreover, to the best of his knowledge, the court case referred to by the Respondent had no
correlation with the information sought by him.



The Commission felt that correct and timely response is the essence of the RTI mechanism
enacted to ensure transparency and accountability in the working of Public Authorities. 
In this
context, the Commission referred to the decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in 
Mujibur
Rehman vs Central Information Commission (W.P. (C
) 3845/2007)(Dated 28 April, 2009)
wherein it had been held as under:




       "14.......The court cannot be unmindful of the circumstances under which the Act was
       framed, and brought into force. It seeks to foster an "openness culture" among state
       agencies, and a wider section of "public authorities" whose actions have a significant or
       lasting impact on the people and their lives. Information seekers are to be furnished
       what they ask for, unless the Act prohibits disclosure; they are not to be driven away
       through sheer inaction or filibustering tactics of the public authorities or their officers.

       It is to ensure these ends that time limits have been prescribed, in absolute terms, as
       well as penalty provisions. These are meant to ensure a culture of information
       disclosure so necessary for a robust and functioning democracy."



With regard to providing a clear and cogent response to the Complainant, the Commission
referred to the decision of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in 
J P Aggarwal v. Union of India (WP
(C
) no. 7232/2009 wherein it was held that:




       " 7"it is the PIO to whom the application is submitted and it is who is responsible for
       ensuring that the information as sought is provided to the applicant within the statutory
       requirements of the Act. Section 5(4) is simply to strengthen the authority of the PIO
       within the department; if the PIO finds a default by those from whom he has sought
       information. The PIO is expected to recommend a remedial action to be taken". 
The RTI
       Act
 makes the PIO the pivot for enforcing the implementation of the Act."



       8.............The PIO is expected to apply his / her mind, duly analyse the material before
       him / her and then either disclose the information sought or give grounds for non-
       disclosure."



The Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the case of 
Shri Vivek Mittal v. B.P. Srivastava, W.P.(C
)
19122/2006 dated 24.08.2009 had upheld the view of the CIC and observed



                                                                                        Page 2 of 5

        ".....that a CPIO cannot escape his obligations and duties by stating that persons
       appointed under him had failed to collect documents and information. 
The Act
 as
       framed, castes obligation upon the CPIOs and fixes responsibility in case there is
       failure or delay in supply of information. It is the duty of the CPIOs to ensure that the
       provisions of the Act are fully complied with and in case of default, necessary
       consequences follow".




Furthermore, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of R.K. Jain vs Union of India, LPA
No. 369/2018, dated 29.08.2018, held as under:

       "9................................ That apart, the CPIO being custodian of the information
       or the documents sought for, is primarily responsible under the scheme of the 
RTI Act

       to supply the information and in case of default or dereliction on his part, the penal
       action is to be invoked against him only.

Furthermore, in OM No. 20/10/23/2007-IR dated 09.07.2009, while elaborating on the duties and
responsibilities of the FAA, it was stated that:



       "3. Deciding appeals under the 
RTI Act
 is a quasi judicial function. It is, therefore,
       necessary that the appellate authority should see that the justice is not only done but it
       should also appear to have been done. In order to do so, the order passed by the
       appellate authority should be a speaking order giving justification for the decision
       arrived at."



The Commission also noted that it should be the endeavour of the CPIO to ensure that maximum
assistance should be provided to the RTI applicants to ensure the flow of information. In this
context, the Commission referred to the OM No.4/9/2008-IR dated 24.06.2008 issued by the
DoP&T on the Subject "Courteous behavior with the persons seeking information under the 
RTI
Act, 2005
" wherein it was stated as under:



       "The undersigned is directed to say that the responsibility of a public authority and its
       public information officers (PIO) is not confined to furnish information but also to
       provide necessary help to the information seeker, wherever necessary."



Moreover, it was observed that as per the provisions of 
section 8 (1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005, no
specific exemption is codified which allowed non-disclosure of information on the ground that
the matter on which information is sought is sub-judice. 
In this context, the following extract of
the decision of the High Court of Delhi in 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. R.K. Jain
 in W.P.
(C) 14120/ 2009 dated 23.09.2010 can be cited:




       "5...........The matter being sub judice before a court is not one of the categories of
       information which is exempt from disclosure under any of the clauses of 
Section 8(1)
 of
       the RTI Act."



The Commission in its decision in 
Mr. Ashu v. CPIO/ Sr. Supdt of Posts, Department of Posts
 in
CIC/BS/A/2015/001578/11769 dated 28.11.2016 had held as under:




                                                                                       Page 3 of 5


        "At the outset it is clarified that the 
RTI Act
 provides no exemption from disclosure
       requirements of sub-judice matters. The only exemption for sub-judice matters is
       regarding what has been expressly forbidden disclosure by a court or a tribunal and
       what may constitute contempt of court."



Furthermore, the Commission in CIC/SM/A/2011/000343/SG/13645 can be cited wherein it was
held as under:



       "The stay order(s) of the High Court of Delhi do not appear to have framed a specific
       issue for determination and have granted a stay specifically only on the operation of the
       order of the Commission dated 24/08/2009. No claim for the exemption has been made by
       the PIO as per the 
RTI Act
. However, the Commission assumes that the PIO is claiming
       that disclosure of information is exempt since the matter is sub- judice. The only
       exemption which may relate to matters in court is 
Section 8(1)(b)
 of the RTI Act. 
Section
       8(1) (b)
 of the RTI Act exempts from disclosure "information which has been expressly
       forbidden to be published by any court of law or tribunal or the disclosure of which may
       constitute contempt of court". From a plain reading of 
Section 8(1)(b)
 of the RTI Act, it is
       clear that it does not include sub- judice matters. As mentioned above, information may
       be exempted from disclosure in accordance with 
Section 8
 and 
9
 only and no other
       exemptions can be claimed while rejecting a demand for disclosure. Hence, disclosing
       information on matters which are sub- judice cannot constitute contempt of Court, unless
       there is a specific order forbidding its disclosure. The mere claim that a matter is sub-
       judice cannot be used as a reason for denying information under the 
RTI Act
. In view of
       the same, the Commission rules that the denial of information by the PIO on queries 36
       and 38 of the RTI application is legally untenable. Moreover, in view of the observations
       laid down above, the decisions cited by the PIO are not relevant to the present matter."



The Commission in the matter of 
Shri Nanak Chand Arora v. State Bank of India
 in
CIC/MA/A/2006/00018 dated 30.06.2006 had also held as under:




       "10 The CPIO and the Chief Manager of the Bank has not responded to the information
       seeker in the spirit in which the Act seeks to promote transparency in functioning of the
       Bank. He has mis-interpreted the provision of the Act and informed that there was no
       provision for inspection of the record in the Act. This is contrary to the provision u/ s 2

       (f). He has also not indicated as to why the report could not be disclosed, except that the
       matter was sub-judice. There is no provision in the Act which restricts the disclosure of
       information merely on the ground of the fact that matter is pending with the Consumer
       Court. In the instant case, the Court has not forbidden the disclosure of investigation
       report or inspection of record."



The Commission observed that there is complete negligence and laxity in the public authority in
dealing with the RTI applications. It is abundantly clear that such matters are being ignored and
set aside without application of mind which reflects disrespect towards the 
RTI Act, 2005
 itself.
The Commission expressed its displeasure on the casual and callous approach adopted by the
Respondent in responding to the RTI application. It was felt that the conduct of Respondent was
against the spirit of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 which was enacted to ensure greater transparency and
effective access to the information.



                                                                                        Page 4 of 5


 The Respondent was not present to contest the submissions of the Appellant or to substantiate
their claims further.



DECISION:



Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions made by the Appellant and in the light
of above referred decisions of the Superior Court, the Commission directs the Chief Engineer,
Dwarka, DDA to examine the RTI application of the Appellant in accordance with 
Section 5 (4)

of the RTI Act, 2005 and furnish complete information as sought in the RTI application, within a
period of 15 days from the date of receipt of this order, under intimation to the Commission
failing which penal action could be initiated under 
Section 20 (1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.



The Commission also instructs the Respondent Public Authority to convene periodic
conferences/seminars to sensitize, familiarize and educate the concerned officials about the
relevant provisions of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 for effective discharge of its duties and responsibilities

The Appeal stands disposed accordingly.



                                                                   (Bimal Julka) (िबमल जु का)
                                                     (Information Commissioner) (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत त)




(K.L. Das) (के .एल.दास)
(Dy. Registrar) (उप-पंजीयक)
011-26182598/ 
[email protected]

 दनांक / Date: 04.03.2020



Copy to:-



   1. The Pr. Commissioner cum Secretary, DDA, B-Block, 4th Floor, Vikas Sadan, INA,
      New Delhi.



   2. Chief Engineer, Dwarka Zone, DDA Office, Manglapuri, New Delhi


   3. Superintending Engineer and FAA, Circle - 17, DDA, Lakkad Mandi, Kirti Nagar
      New Delhi - 110055





                                                                                        Page 5 of 5