[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Girish Mittal vs Reserve Bank Of India on 13 July, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                               के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                        Central Information Commission
                            बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                         Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/RBIND/A/2022/607621

Girish Mittal                                      ......अपीलकता /Appellant


                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम


CPIO,
Department of Banking Supervision,
Reserve Bank of India, RTI Cell,
World Trade Centre, Cuffe Parade, Colaba,
Mumbai-400005, Maharashtra.                    .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                   :   27/06/2023
Date of Decision                  :   27/06/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on          :   01/05/2021
CPIO replied on                   :   31/05/2021
First appeal filed on             :   03/06/2021
First Appellate Authority order   :   Not on record
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated        :   06/02/2022




                                         1
 Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 01.05.2021 seeking the following
information:



"Kindly provide following information:

Inspection Reports/Risk Assessment Report made by RBI post completing the
Inspection of commercial banks and NBFCs for last 3 years available. If RBI has
provided any of the below information earlier, the same may be Indicated In the
response quoting the date/ RTI number under which the same was provided:



      (I) HDFC Bank.

      (II) RBL Bank.

      (III) Yes Bank.

      (Iv) Axis Bank.

      (v) ICICI Sank.

      (vI) Baja) Finance.

      (vvI) State Bank of India.

      (viii) Bank of Baroda.

      (Ix) Indus Ind Bank.

      (x) Kotak Mahindra Bank.

      (xi) HDFC Ltd.

      (xii) ILFS

      (xiii) IDFC Bank

      (xiv) sahara India Financial Services or any entity of Sahara group registered
      with RBI.



Kindly also provide copies of show cause notices issued to any of the above and
response of these banks/NBFCs."



The CPIO furnished a pointwise reply to the appellant on 31.05.2021 stating as
under:



"1. HDFC Bank:

      As regards the Inspection Reports/ Risk Assessment Reports for the years
2017-18 & FY 2018-19, we have issued notice
 u/s 11(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 to the
bank concerned. On receipt of reply from the bank, further communication will be
made.



                                         2


 
As regards the Risk Assessment Report/Inspection Report for the year 2019-
20, it is informed that the supervisory process/ action in the matter is not yet
complete. Disclosure of such information at this stage is considered premature in
terms of Para 77 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court Judgement dated December 16,
2015 in 
'Reserve Bank of India vs. Jayantilal Mistry Case
' [2016 (3) SCC 525]. Hence
the information is exempt from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(a)
 of the RTI Act,
2005.




2. RBL Bank:

 
As regards the Risk Assessment Reports/Inspection Reports for the years
2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20, it is informed that the supervisory process/ action
in the matter is not yet complete. Disclosure of such information at this stage is
considered premature in terms of Para 77 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
Judgement dated December 16, 2015 in 
'Reserve Bank of India vs. Jayantilal
Mistry Case
' [2016 (3) SCC 525]. Hence the information is exempt from disclosure
under 
Section 8(1)(a)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.




3., 4 & 5: Yes Bank, Axis Bank , 5. ICICI Bank:



       As regards the Inspection Reports/ Risk Assessment Reports for the years
2017-18 & 2018-19, we have issued notice
 u/s 11(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 to the
bank concerned. On receipt of reply from the bank, further communication will be
made.

 
As regards the Risk Assessment Report/Inspection Report for the year 2019-
20, it is informed that the supervisory process/ action in the matter is not yet
complete. Disclosure of such information at this stage is considered premature in
terms of Para 77 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court Judgement dated December 16,
2015 in 
'Reserve Bank of India vs. Jayantilal Mistry Case
' [2016 (3) SCC 525]. Hence
the information is exempt from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(a)
 of the RTI Act,
2005.




6. Bajaj finance:

       As regards the Annual Financial Inspection Reports for the years 2017-18 &
2018-19, we have issued notice
 u/s 11(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 to the company. On
receipt of reply from the company, further communication will be made.



 
As regards the Risk Assessment Report/Inspection Report for the year 2019-
20, it is informed that the supervisory process/ action in the matter is not yet
complete. Disclosure of such information at this stage is considered premature in

                                           3

 terms of Para 77 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court Judgement dated December 16,
2015 in 
'Reserve Bank of India vs. Jayantilal Mistry Case
' [2016 (3) SCC 525]. Hence
the information is exempt from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(a)
 of the RTI Act,
2005.




7, 8, 9 & 10: SBI, Bank of Baroda , IndusBAnk, Kotak Mahindra Bank
       As regards the Inspection Reports/ Risk Assessment Reports for the years
2017-18 & 2018-19, we have issued notice
 u/s 11(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 to the
bank concerned. On receipt of reply from the bank, further communication will be
made.



 
As regards the Risk Assessment Report/Inspection Report for the year 2019-
20, it is informed that the supervisory process/ action in the matter is not yet
complete. Disclosure of such information at this stage is considered premature in
terms of Para 77 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court Judgement dated December 16,
2015 in 
'Reserve Bank of India vs. Jayantilal Mistry Case
' [2016 (3) SCC 525]. Hence
the information is exempt from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(a)
 of the RTI Act,
2005.




11. HDFC Ltd.:

       It has been partially transferred to NHB under 
Section 6(3)
 of RTI Act, 2005,
for furnishing direct reply to the applicant.



12. ILFS:

 
As regards the Risk Assessment Reports/Inspection Reports for the years
2017-18, 2018-19 & 2019-20, it is informed that the supervisory process/ action in
the matter is not yet complete. Disclosure of such information at this stage is
considered premature in terms of Para 77 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
Judgement dated December 16, 2015 in 
'Reserve Bank of India vs. Jayantilal
Mistry Case
' [2016 (3) SCC 525]. Hence the information is exempt from disclosure
under 
Section 8(1)(a)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.




13. IDFC Bank:

 
As regards the Inspection Reports/ Risk Assessment Reports for the years
2017-18 & 2018-19, we have issued notice
 u/s 11(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 to the
bank concerned. On receipt of reply from the bank, further communication will be
made. 2. As regards the Risk Assessment Reports/Inspection Reports for the year
2019-20, it is informed that the supervisory process/ action in the matter is not yet
complete. Disclosure of such information at this stage is considered premature in

                                         4

 terms of Para 77 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court Judgement dated December 16,
2015 in 
'Reserve Bank of India vs. Jayantilal Mistry Case
' [2016 (3) SCC 525]. Hence
the information is exempt from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(a)
 of the RTI Act,
2005.




14. Inspection of Sahara India Financial Corporation Limited or Sahara India Corp
Investment Limited has not been conducted in last three years (Since April 01,
2018).



Point NO.2 :

      The information as desired by the applicant is not maintained in compiled
manner and compilation thereof for replying to the RTI application, will divert our
resources in a disproportionate manner. Hence, we are unable to provide
information in terms of 
Section 7(9)
 of RTI Act, 2005.



Point NO.3:

       As regards the copies of Show cause notices issued to the above mentioned
entities during the period three years prior to the date of the application i.e. May
2018 to April 2021, we have issued notice
 u/s 11(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 to the
entities concerned (State Bank of India [RAR 2017], IndusInd Bank Ltd. [RAR 2019],
HDFC Bank Ltd. [RAR 2017] and Bajaj Finance Ltd. [IR 2018 and IR 2019]). On
receipt of reply from the entities, further communication will be made."



Being dissatisfied, the Appellant filed a First Appeal dated 03.06.2021. FAA's
order, if any, is not on record.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the Appellant approached the Commission
with the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present through Video-Conference.

Respondent: Shri Vinod Kumar, DGM and Shri Abhijeet Kaushal, Legal Officer
present through Video-Conference.



The written submissions of the Appellant and the Respondent are taken on
record.



                                         5


 
The Appellant, during the hearing, reiterated the contents of his RTI application
and instant appeal and submitted that the Respondent has wrongly not provided
information to him on his RTI application. He further submitted that the
information denied is been covered in the directions of Hon'ble Supreme Court in

Jayantilal Mistry
 case as well as the contempt petition in Girish Mittal case.
 
Also,
Hon'ble Delhi High Court in 
Commr. Of Police v. D.K. Sharma, WP (C) No.
 12428 of
2009, dated 15-12-2010, wherein it was held that: "...Court is inclined to concur
with the view expressed by the CIC that in order to deny the information under the

RTI Act
 the authority concerned would have to show a justification reference to
one of the specific clauses under 
Section 8 (1)
 of the RTI Act." No justification has
been showed by the CPIO under 
section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005.




The Appellant further reiterated his written submissions, which states as under:
"In the judgment under review, this Court has also held after examining the
provisions of the Act that the Information Commission decides matters which may
affect the rights of third parties and hence there is requirement of judicial mind.
For example, under 
Section 8(1)(d)
 of the Act, there is no obligation to furnish
information including commercial confidence, trade secrets, or intellectual
property, the disclosure of which would harm the competitive position of the third
party, unless the competent authority is satisfied that the larger public interest
warrants the disclosure of such information. Similarly, the right to privacy of a
third party, which is part of his personal liberty under 
Article 21
 of the
Constitution, may be breached if a particular kind of information, purely of
personal nature may be directed to be furnished by the concerned authority. To
protect the rights of third parties, 
Section 11
 of the Act provides that where a
Central Public Information Officer or a State Public Information Officer, as the case
may be, intends to disclose any information or record or part thereof, may on a
request made under the Act, which relates to or has been supplied by a third party
and has been treated as confidential by that third party, a written notice will have
to be given to such third party inviting such party to make a submission in writing
or orally, regarding whether the information should be disclosed, and such
submission of the third party can be kept in view while taking a decision about
disclosure of the information. The decision taken by the Central Public Information
Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, under 
Section
11
 of the Act is appealable under 
Section 19
 of the Act before the Information
Commission and when the Information Commission decides such an appeal, it
decides only whether or not the information should be furnished to the citizen in
view of the objection of the third party. Here also the Information Commission
does not decide the rights of a third party but only whether the information which

                                         6

 is held by or under the control of a public authority in relation to or supplied by
that third party could be furnished to a citizen under the provisions of the Act.

Hence, the Information Commission discharges administrative functions, not
judicial functions."



The Respondent, during the hearing, reiterated the contents of their written
submissions, which states as under:

"The Appellant preferred Second Appeal before this Hon'ble CIC wherein he has
contended that that the CPIO denied information on flimsy grounds and that the
FAA order Is not on record. The Information denied is covered in the directions of
Hon'ble Supreme Court In 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case as well as the contempt petition in
Girish Mittal case. 7. It is humbly submitted that the CPIO has duly discharged his
duties in accordance with the provisions of the 
RTI Act
. It is submitted that though
Supreme Court in the matter of Jayantilal N Mistry has directed Reserve Bank to
uphold the public interest and not the interest of any bank and directed to disclose
the Information, it has not forbidden the public authority to follow the procedure
as contemplated under 
RTI Act
.
 
Further, in the matter of Girlsh Mittal, Supreme
Court has observed that the respondents (, Reserve Bank of India) are duty bound
to furnish all information relating to inspection reports and other materials apart
from material that was exempted in para 77 of the judgement' in 
Reserve Bank of
India v. Jayantilal Mistry Case
. Hence, the contention of the appellant that the
CPIO has denied the information on flimsy grounds is incorrect and denied, it is
submitted that the CPIO has utmost regard to the judicial and quasi-judicial
authorities of the Country and all the actions taken by the CPIO is in accordance
with the law. 8. As regards allegation of the Appellant that FAA order was not
provided, the same is denied as incorrect. It is submitted that the FAA order dated
10.08.2021 dismissing the first appeal dated 16.07.2021 filed by the appellant was
uploaded on the RTI portal on the very same day itself i.e., 10.08.2021. Further,
the said order was also forwarded to the Appellant vide letter dated 11.08.2021
sent through speed post on 11.08.2021. The said letter has not returned
undelivered and is deemed served upon the appellant. A copy of the forwarding
letter and speed post receipt is annexed herewith and marked as Annexure-4
(colly). 9. It is humbly submitted that in the present RTI application filed by the
applicant, for disclosure of information, the CPIO had followed procedure
contemplated under 
Section 11
 of the RTI Act, 2005. The third parties concerned
(Nine banks and One NBFC) had filed first appeal(s) against the decision of the
CPIO to disclose the information vide notice issued 
Section 11 (3)
 of the RTI Act.


Since FAA has upheld the decision of the CPIO to disclose the information, the
affected third parties have filed second appeal(s) against respective FAA order(s).

                                         7


 While disposing of these second appeals, Hon'ble CIC vide order dated 05.05.2022
remanded the matters to the CPIO for adjudication afresh. In compliance to
directions contained in aforesaid CIC order, the CPIO had issued fresh notices to
third parties concerned under 
Section 11 (1)
 & (2) of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 and after
considering their responses and after according opportunity of personal hearing to
all the parties concerned, the CPIO had Issued notices under 
Section 11 (3)
 to the
third parties conveying his decision to disclose the information after redacting the
information under applicable exemptions as provided under 
Section 8 (1)
 of the
RTI Act, 2005. Again, the third parties had filed first appeals against the CPIO's
decision which was dismissed by the FAA and aggrieved, they have filed second
appeal(s) against the respective FAA order(s), which are pending adjudication
before Hon'ble CIC".



Decision:



In the facts of the instant case, it is pertinent to note that a decision of a
coordinate bench of the Commission in the matter of various third-party banks vs.
RBI vide File No. CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 covers a
detailed discussion inter alia on the same nature of information sought for from
the RBI and the reliance placed by RBI on the 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case. Suffice to say
that the issues raised in the instant case are encapsulated in that same discussion
of the coordinate bench in the following manner:




 
"39. A comprehensive view has to be taken on the objection filed by the
institutions. These objectives has to be deliberated and adjudicated in the light of

Jayantilal Mistry
's case and other judicial pronouncements relevant in such
matter, some of which have been referred by the Commission in the above parts
as well. The Commission while examining various objections realize that the Writ
Petitions filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is seeking directions of
the Supreme Court for non-disclosure of certain aspects of these audit/inspection
report and any such guidance in these Writ Petitions will have direct bearing and
provide further clarity to the CPIO/FAA in adjudicating various aspects of
disclosure/non-disclosure of reports or the information/data which are part of
these reports under the provisions of the 
RTI Act
.
 The Commission takes note that
all the cases/second appeals filed herein are based on interpretations of RBI Vs.
Jayantilal Mistry case and other relevant judicial pronouncements requesting for
full disclosure vis-à-vis with exemptions under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act for non-
disclosure of full or parts of these reports.



                                         8


 
40. In view of the above observations, the Commission is of the view that
the reports generated in the hands of regulatory public authority in discharge of
its statutory obligations are information under 
Section 2 (f)
 of the RTI Act, as the
regulator and the regulated entities are not governed by fiduciary relationship.
The orders of the Commission to their effect has been upheld by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case and the position is unchanged even
today. Various objections filed by banks/financial institutions, to be examined,
analyzed and adjudicated upon, are related to various data and information
submitted to the Reserve Bank of India by these financial institutions explaining
their operations, commercial decisions, clients data etc. under statutory
obligations can be disclosed as such. There are apparently two set of such
information which have been shared by the institutions with the regulator under
statutory obligation. First is the information/data of clients relating to their
business/commercial operations, financial transactions, business and commercial
strategy which is shared by clients with financial institutions in full trust and
confidence and is held by them in fiduciary capacity, protected from disclosure
under the 
RTI Act
 in their hands. Second set is the information relating to business
strategy, decisions, transactions, other operational data etc. of financial
institutions have been bearing on their competitive position which also enjoys the
exemption from disclosure in their hands, if it is a public authority or otherwise,
under the 
RTI Act
. Some of such data, on case to case basis be sensitive enough for
protection of national interest. The Commission is of the view that the protection
of disclosure of information under 
Section 8(1)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 in the hands of
financial institutions does not evaporate once such data/information is shared, in
good faith and trust, with the regulator under statutory obligation.
 
Various
observations of Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
's case also does not
indicate so and decision of the regulator to consider redacting such
data/information while disclosing the reports is aligned with this and other judicial
pronouncements of Supreme Court and High Courts.


 
41. The Commission has already outlined the deficiency in the conduct of
the CPIO/FAA while hearing such matters and hence is of the opinion that due care
has to be taken by according opportunity of personal hearing and making
reasoned order with reference to the objections in the hands of the CPIO and later
in the hands of FAA, if any appeal is preferred. Hence, the CPIO will be required to
adjudicate such RTI applications in the light of the observations of the Commission
afresh. The Commission also expects that the CPIO will take view on various
objections filed by the Banks and Financial Institutions and submissions made by
applicant to reach the decision in favour or against redaction of various parts of
the report on case to case basis. He has to factor the observation of Hon'ble

                                         9

 Supreme Court in 
Jayantilal Mistry
 case and other relevant judgments, some of
which have been referred in this order as well. Hence, with these observations the
orders passed by the CPIO and FAA in these matters are set aside and the cases
are being remanded to the CPIO for adjudication afresh. (Emphasis Supplied)


       42. It is amply clear that Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and
others tagged are admitted in Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein guidance and
direction has been sought on non-disclosure of certain type of information which
are essentially the part of the Annual Inspection Report/RAR, etc. These petitions
also seek protection of interim communication between regulator and the
regulated entity in the process of finalization of these reports or otherwise. It is
obvious that decision in these Writ Petitions will provide clarity and guidance to
the Public Authority on redaction/non-disclosure of a set of information inspite of
being part of these reports which are open to disclosure. At this stage, any
decision by the Public Authority will amount to pre-judging the issues pending
admitted Writ Petitions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Various banks,
financial institutions, respondent public authority and the RTI applicant have
already impleaded party and are presenting their arguments before the Apex
Court.

       43. Hence, any decision of redaction or disclosure of information, without
waiting for decision in the Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged may cause irrevocable damage against right of privacy and protection of
commercial interest. Hence, the respondent public authority if expedient may
wait for the outcome in Writ Petition Nos. 1159/2019 and 768/2021 and others
tagged or seek clarification from the Hon'ble Court and accordingly decide these
RTI applications by following process as enumerated in the earlier paras by the
Commission in the interest of principles of natural justice. While disclosing the
information they should be cautious in taking a considerate view balancing right
to privacy, protection of national and commercial interest on one hand vis-à-vis
larger public interest. (Emphasis Supplied)

 
44. It is further observed that similar view has also been taken by the
Division Bench of the Commission in file bearing nos. CIC/VS/A/2013/001488 and
CIC/VS/A/2013/001805 dated 11.05.2017 wherein the Commission observed that
'Having considered the submissions of both the parties, the Commission observes
that since a similar issue is pending adjudication before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the matter of Central for 
Public Interest Litigation Vs. Housing & Urban
Development Corporation Ltd. &Ors.
, it would be judicious to await the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court. However, on receipt of the final
outcome from the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter, the appellant shall be at



                                        10

 liberty to file second appeal afresh, if he so desires. The instant appeals are
disposed of'."




The above decision is therefore applicable to the instant case and no separate line
of adjudication is warranted in the matter. The stipulations contained in File No.
CIC/RBIND/A/2021/152460 + Ors. dated 05.05.2022 stands endorsed to the
Respondent CPIO with emphasis on para 41 & 43 supplied as above .



                      The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                        11