[Cites 
6
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Manoj Kumar Jain vs Chief Commissioner Of Income Tax (Cca), ... on 10 January, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/CCITD/A/2021/129228

Manoj Kumar Jain                                          ......अपीलकता /Appellant


                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम
CPIO,
The CPIO Office of the Asstt.
Commissioner of Income Tax,
Central Circle-II, Noida
2nd Floor, ARTO Complex,
Sector-33, Noida                                        .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                     :   19/09/2022
Date of Decision                    :   29/12/2022

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :              Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on            :   14/10/2020
CPIO replied on                     :   04/11/2020
First appeal filed on               :   19/11/2020
First Appellate Authority's order   :   05/01/2021
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated          :   14/07/2021

Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 14.10.2020 seeking the following
information:

      "As you are aware that assessment order u/s 153C/143(3) of the Income tax
Act, 1961 was passed in the case of M/s Sunshine Infratech Pvt. Ltd. on
29.03.2016. for A.Y. 2008-09 to 2014-15. Vide letters dated 19/02/2019.
27/06/2019, certain information's were called for under Right to information Act

                                          1

 2020 for preparing appeal arguments before ITAT. Vide letter dated 15/03/2019,
you have denied to provide information by stating that information pertain to
third party. By denying the information you have not followed the procedure
provided under section 11 of the Right to information Act, 2005, which provides
that within 5 days PIO should have issued the notice to such third party within 5
days from the date of receipt of application and after receiving reply from third
party may take decision to supply the information and you have not followed the
provision of section 11 of the Act. Further, no information as per application dated
27/06/2019 is supplied to assessee. It shows the working of your office in making
compliance of 
Right to Information Act, 2020
. Without prejudice to above, the
following information's/documents are required: -

  1. Please provide the copy of satisfaction note (if any) recorded in the case of Sh.
     Mukesh Khurana & Babita Khurana.

  2. Please provide the copy of satisfaction note (if any) recorded in the case of
     Bhanvi Buildtech Pvt. Ltd.

  3. Please provide the copy of satisfaction note (if any) recorded in the case of
     Shubhkamnai Buildtech Pvt. Ltd.

  4. Copy of assessment orders of all above assessee names Sh. Mukesh Khurana
     Babita Khurana, Bhavni Buildtech Pvt. Ltd.

  5. Copy of appeal orders of CIT(A) in all above cases. (if any) to state the latest
     status of the proceedings.

  6. Copies of all satisfaction note recorded in the case of assessee i.e. M/s
     Sunshine Infratech Pvt. Ltd.

  7. Please provide details of dispatch of assessment order in the case of assessee
     i.e. M/s Sunshine Infratech Pvt. Ltd. Along with speed post tracking to prove
     that assessment order was dispatched on or before 31.03.2016.

  8. Please provide the certified copy of order sheet in the case of Sunshine
     Infratech Private Limited.

  9. Please provide the copy of notices issued
 u/s 142(1)
 and 
143(2)
 of the Act
     with proof of service of notices upon the assessee.

  10.Please provide the copy of notice issued
 u/s 143(2)
 of the Act along with
     proof of service of notice on assessee.

  11.PIease Provide the copy of approval
 u/s 153D
 of the Act showing date of
     sending order to JCIT. Central Circle Meerut. received back the draft order
     with approval and order sheet entry."



The CPIO furnished a reply to the appellant on 04.11.2020 stating as follows:-



                                          2


    1. "The information sought by you is third party information and does not
      directly pertain to you.

   2. The remainder information which belongs to you, being voluminous may be
      provided after submitting, requisite fee through Income Tax ...........to the
      office."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 19.11.2020. FAA's order
dated 05.01.2021 upheld the reply of CPIO.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present through intra-video conference.
Respondent: Vindhya Nupur, DCIT & CPIO present through intra-video
conference.



The CPIO submitted that the Appellant has been provided with the documents
requested for at points 6-11 of the RTI Application that pertained to M/s Sunshine
Infractech Pvt. Ltd., as being the legal representative of the said entity. She
further submitted that however, the documents sought for at points 1-5 could not
be provided to the Appellant as it pertained to the assessment of third parties and
no consent was accorded by the third parties for disclosing their information.



The Appellant outrightly denied to have received the documents claimed to have
been provided by the CPIO for points 6-11 of the RTI Application, but largely
premised his arguments on the denial of the information on points 1-5. He argued
that since the documents sought for by him were used against M/s Sunshine
Infractech Pvt. Ltd., the same cannot be denied as third-party information. He
agitated at length on the argument that since the assessment of M/s Sunshine
Infractech Pvt. Ltd. was carried out on the allegation that certain documents were
found in the possession of the averred third parties, he has a right to know about
these documents.



The CPIO interjected to state that the base document that the Appellant is
referring to has been already provided to him as per extant rules, to which, the
Appellant admitted that he is possession of the relevant documents, but
continued to insist that since the case of M/s Sunshine Infractech Pvt. Ltd. is


                                         3

 interlinked with the cases of the averred third parties, the information sought for
at points 1-5 of the RTI Application ought to be provided to him.



Decision:



The Commission based on a perusal of the facts on record and from the
submissions of the parties during the hearing observes that issue for
determination is being restricted to the disclosure of the records sought for at
points 1-5 of the instant RTI Application. It is pertinent to note that the
information sought for at points 1-5, ostensibly relate to third parties, while the
only insistence of the Appellant is that the assessment of the said third parties is
interlinked with that of his firm i.e M/s Sunshine Infractech Pvt. Ltd. However,
that does not take away the protection afforded to the personal information of
third parties as envisaged under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act. For the sake of
clarity, the said exemption of 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act is reproduced as under:



      "Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there shall be no
obligation to give any citizen:



       (j) information which relates to personal information the disclosure of which
has no relationship to any public activity or interest, or which would cause
unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual unless the Central Public
Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer or the appellate
authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that the larger public interest justifies
the disclosure of such information:.."



In this regard, the attention of the Appellant is further drawn towards a judgment
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of Central Public Information Officer,
Supreme Court of 
India Vs. Subhash Chandra Agarwal
 in Civil Appeal No. 10044
of 2010 with Civil Appeal No. 10045 of 2010 and Civil Appeal No. 2683 of 2010
wherein the import of "personal information" envisaged under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of
RTI Act has been exemplified in the context of earlier ratios 
laid down by
 the
same Court in the matter(
s) of Canara Bank Vs. C.S. Shyam
 in Civil Appeal No.22
of 2009; 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande vs. Central Information Commissioner &
Ors.
, (2013) 1 SCC 212 and R.K. Jain vs. Union of India & Anr., (2013) 14 SCC 794.
The following was thus held:




      "59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion, would
indicate that personal records, including name, address, physical, mental and
psychological status, marks obtained, grades and answer sheets, are all treated as

                                         4

 personal information. Similarly, professional records, including qualification,
performance, evaluation reports, ACRs, disciplinary proceedings, etc. are all
personal information. Medical records, treatment, choice of medicine, list of
hospitals and doctors visited, findings recorded, including that of the family
members, information relating to assets, liabilities, income tax returns, details of
investments, lending and borrowing, etc. are personal information. Such
personal information is entitled to protection from unwarranted invasion of
privacy and conditional access is available when stipulation of larger public
interest is satisfied. This list is indicative and not exhaustive..." Emphasis Supplied

Having observed as above, the Commission does not find any infirmity in the
denial of the information by the CPIO.



However, in view of the insistence of the Appellant during the hearing, the CPIO is
directed to revisit the relevant and available records corresponding to points 1-5
of the RTI Application and ascertain if any information relates to M/s Sunshine
Infractech Pvt. Ltd. therein. If any part of the said record entails a mention of the
case of M/s Sunshine Infractech Pvt. Ltd., that portion of the record be redacted
and provided to the Appellant free of cost. The redaction of records, if any, shall
be carried out in consonance with 
Section 10
 of the RTI Act. If no such reference
to the case of M/s Sunshine Infractech Pvt. Ltd. is found in the available records
corresponding to points 1-5 of the RTI Application, the CPIO shall provide a
revised reply to this effect to the Appellant.



Further, although the Appellant did not seek for any relief for points 6-11 of the
RTI Application during the hearing, nonetheless, since there is no material on
record to show that the copy of documents were provided to the Appellant after
the reply of 04.11.2020, the CPIO is directed to resend to the Appellant a copy of
their reply vide which the remainder of the information on points 6-11 of the RTI
Application was provided to him earlier.



A compliance report to this effect shall be duly sent to the Commission by the
CPIO immediately thereafter.



                      The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                     Saroj Punhani (सरोजपुनहािन)
                                                                           हािन)
                                          Information Commissioner (सूचनाआयु )



                                         5

 Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                 6