[Cites 
9
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Abhishek Shukla vs Cbi on 2 June, 2020


                               के ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                            बाबा गंगनाथ माग, मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

File No : CIC/CBRUI/A/2018/624362

Abhishek Shukla                                           ....अपीलकता/Appellant
                                       VERSUS
                                        बनाम
CPIO,
Central Bureau of Investigation,
Policy Division,
Room No. 25 - A,
North Block,
New Delhi - 110001.                                   ... ितवादीगण /Respondent

RTI application filed on           :   02/05/2018
CPIO replied on                    :   09/05/2018
First appeal filed on              :   10/05/2018
First Appellate Authority order    :   29/05/2018
Second Appeal dated                :   23/06/2018
Date of Interim Decision           :   07/01/2020
Date of Final Decision             :   02/06/2020

            lwpuk vk;qDr                :         fnO; izdk"k flUgk
   INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :                   DIVYA PRAKASH SINHA

Information sought
:

The Appellant sought details of all Preliminary Enquiries having allegations of
corruption which have been closed by the agency without registering the
FIR/Regular case between 2014-18 along with copies of these closed PE, date of
registering the PE, date of closure of the PE and the reasons behind the closure of
the PE.



                                            1


 Grounds for the Second Appeal:

The CPIO has not provided the desired information.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing on 07.01.2020:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present in person.



Respondent: Anupam Mathur, Inspector & Rep. of CPIO, Central Bureau of
Investigation, Policy Division, North Block, New Delhi present in person.



Interim Decision on 07.01.2020

On the basis of the proceedings during hearing, Commission observes that the
Appellant desires to contest the exemption taken by the CBI under 
Section 24
 of
the RTI Act in the present matter at length. In view of that, Commission directs
him to send a written submission highlighting the factum as to how the veil of
exemption granted to the CBI will not be applicable in the instant Second
Appeal/present matter within 15 days from the date of receipt of this order. A
copy of the written submission should also be sent to the Respondent who can
send counter submission, if they desire within 15 days from the date of receipt of
the written submission of the Appellant.

                      The appeal is reserved for Final Order.



FINAL DECISION PROCEEDINGS

Commission received a detailed written submission of the Appellant arguing the
applicability of the proviso of 
Section 24(1)
 of RTI Act and contesting the claim of

Section 8(1)(g)
 of RTI Act made by the CPIO with respect to the information
sought in the instant RTI Application.



Appellant has relied on a Full Bench Decision of the Commission in the matter of
VR Chandran Vs Enforcement Directorate dated 28.10.2010 in File No.
CIC/AT/A/2009/000353, related to disclosure of black money lying in Swiss
Banks, wherein the following was held:



                                         2


                                                  File No : CIC/CBRUI/A/2018/624362

       "We would like to dwell upon this aspect of argument in the context of a
proviso built into the 
Section 24
 itself, i.e. that these exemptions are subject to
their not being matters of 'human rights violations' or 'allegations of corruption'.



       In our view, all matters now investigated by the Enforcement Directorate in
the matter of stashing away of Indian money in foreign banks, come within the
definition of allegations of corruption in 
Section 24
. There is eminent and
compelling reason why this exception must be applied in the present case."



Further, he has relied upon a decision of the Commission in the matter of 
CJ
Karira Vs. CBI
 in File No. CIC/SM/C/2012/000374, related to the disclosure of
sanction of prosecution sought by the agency, wherein the following was held:




       "It is true that the CBI is primarily responsible for investigating into all cases
of corruption by public servants of the Central Government. Therefore, most of the
information held by it would have a nexus with allegations of corruption. It is also
true that the proviso to 
Section 24
 of the RTI Act would make it necessary for the
CPIO to entertain all such RTI applications, rendering the exclusion of the
organisation from the operation of the Right to
Information (RTI) Act
 almost
pointless. This cannot be helped asthe law is quite clear; this particular section
does not exclude the exempt organisations from the ambit of the Right to
Information
(RTI) Act
 completely. It is a qualified exemption. It is possible that in
some of the security and intelligence organisations, the information held, by and
large, may not have much nexus with either allegations of corruption or with
human rights violation. By its very nature, the CBI is different from those
organisations in the sense that it primarily deals with cases involving allegations
of corruption. To that extent, the benefit of the exemption available to other such
organisations would not obviously be available to the CBI as most of the
information held by it would be covered by the above proviso."



Appellant has also pointed out that the aforesaid decision of the Commission was
upheld by the Hon'bleDelhi High Court in 
CJ Karira Vs CBI
 in W.P.(C) 7439/2012.




Furthermore, Appellant has relied on the judgment of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in
the matter of Sanjeev Chaturvedi Vs Intelligence Bureau, (W.P.(C) No. 5521 of
2016 & CM No. 23078 of 2016) and a judgment of Hon'ble Madras High Court in

                                           3

 the matter of The Superintendent, the Directorate of Vigilance and
AntiCorruption Vs R Kathikeyan(W.A.Nos.320 & 321 of 2010) to highlight upon
the interpretation accorded by superior courts to the legislative intent contained
in 
Section 24(1)
 of RTI Act. In the context of these citations, he has urged that:



      "Neither the Central Information Commission nor any High Courts
have disputed, expanded, or narrowed down the scope of 
Section 24 (1)
.
They have made it clear that exemption under the Section are not available
to organisations listed in the second schedule when the information sought
pertains to allegations of corruption and human rights violations."



He has further touched upon the import of the terms "pertaining" and
"allegations of corruption", relevant excerpts are reproduced here verbatim:



      "18. The language used by the Parliament is clear that any material in
anyform held by or under the control of an exempted organisation even
loosely related to allegations of corruption will not come under the
exemption ofSection 24 (1).



       19. A verifiable or a proven allegation means a charge. The Parliament
did not use the word 'Corruption and Human Rights Violation' but qualified it
in its wisdom with 'allegations'. When the Legislature had applied its mind,
there is no scope for further qualification."



       "22....Moreover the Law says the Information (any material in any
form)"pertaining to" allegations of corruption will not be exempt. As
explained earlier Pertaining to means connected to, an accessory. A closure
report or any further inquiry, court case, communications, insuch matters
will also pertain to allegation of corruption in the complaint."



The second part of Appellant's submissions concern the claim of 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of
RTI Act made by the CPIO & FAA to deny disclosure of the Preliminary Enquiry
reports. Here, Appellant has brought the attention of the bench to the fact that
CBI has started putting on its website the FIRs in which names of complainants,
accused and investigating officers are made public. Appellant has thus put out a
rhetoric question that when disclosure of details in FIR has not invited any such
instance of endangerment to life and physical safety of any person then on what
grounds the information related to closed preliminary enquiries in which no
action is initiated can endanger the life or physical safety of any person. Appellant
has also stated that details and summary of Preliminary Enquiries have been put
out in the Annual Reports of CBI, which is published on their website for public
access and therefore he insists that disclosing the information sought in the RTI

                                         4

                                               File No : CIC/CBRUI/A/2018/624362

Application in the same format as that of the Annual Report is not going to have
any bearing on the life and physical safety of any individual. In this context,
Appellant has reiterated his grounds of First Appeal wherein he had even trimmed
down his request for information in the following terms:



       "My intention is not to hurt any individual but to get information which
is my Right given by the Constitution. However, the agency cannot adopt
double standards on making public all details in FIRs and withholding those
in closed Preliminary enquiries.



      Identify the source or assistance given in confidence for law
      enforcement:



      i) The agency can severe the names of sources invoking 
Section 10
 of
the RTI Act in cases where it feels that disclosure would expose the person.



      To make it easy for furnishing information, the CPIO may only provide
the same material, about closed preliminary enquiries, which is published in
the CBI annual report every year.



      It carries PE number and summary of allegations. It does not carry
names of any individuals. Along with it only details that I seek is date of
registration and date of closure of the PEs.



      This material exists in the form of soft copies of annual reports which
are held by the Headquarters and will not require diversion of resources."



Following this, he reasserts now at this stage that -



      "32. It is evident that I am seeking information about closed PEs and
the summary of its allegations as is maintained by the CBI for its annual
report..."



      "It is imperative to allow public scrutiny in closed PEs because
unlike FIRs, the CBI does not file any closure reports before the
courts in PEs. It will add to transparency and bring accountability
when people will know which PEs were closed by the agency. That
area is the domain of the CBI with no public scrutiny so far. The
details of the PEs are already published by the CBI in its annual
report with PE number and summary of allegation. I am only seeking
that much information about PEs closed by the agency."(Emphasis
Supplied)


                                          5

 Observations

Based on the facts on record, the moot questions that arise for adjudication are
whether the information sought in the RTI Application concerns allegations of
corruption or not; and if so, whether the exemption of 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of RTI Act
invoked by the CPIO and upheld by the FAA, will be applicable or not.



Having perused the submissions and supporting documents provided by the
Appellant, Commission is by and large convinced with the primary averment of
the Appellant that the information sought pertains to allegations of corruption. In
the context of arguments tendered by the Appellant, this bench is reminded of
the following observation made by it in an earlier case concerning the Anti-
Corruption branch of CBI in File No. CIC/CBRUI/A/2017/173035/SD vide decision
dated 20.05.2019:



      "...At this juncture, Commission finds this pressing need to highlight the
paradox evident in claiming the exemption of 
Section 24(1)
 of RTI Act by the anti-
corruption branch of CBI. In other words, given the fact that the cases referred
to/investigated/enquired by the anti-corruption branch of CBI invariably pertain to
allegations of corruption only; CBI and the Commission cannot be oblivious to the
imperativeness of applying a judicious rationale while assessing the applicability
of the proviso to 
Section 24(1)
 of RTI Act is such cases pertaining to the anti-
corruption branch."



In the instant case also, the above paradox holds true, in as much as Appellant
specifically sought information regarding Preliminary Enquiries made into
allegations of corruption.Yet, the CPIO and FAA failed to appreciate the same
and rather denied the information in almost what seems like a mechanical
disposal of RTI Applications and First Appeals.



Now, the second question is whether 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of RTI Act is applicable for
exempting the information or not.



At the outset, Commission notes that discussion on this aspect has been
significantly narrowed down at this stage with the Appellant having limited his
request to the summary of Preliminary Enquiries as contained in the Annual
Reports, sans the name or identifying particulars of concerned individuals.It is
also noted that Respondent office has not tendered any submission to rebut the
arguments of the Appellant submitted vide his above referred email of

                                         6

                                               File No : CIC/CBRUI/A/2018/624362

24.01.2020, copy of which was marked to the Respondent office at

[email protected]
. However, in keeping with the principle of equity and fairness,
Commission will threadbare analyse the justification tendered by the FAA in his
order dated 29.05.2018. FAA has held therein that in addition to identifying the
source of information given inconfidence forlaw/security/enforcement purposes,
disclosure of names, information about suspects of Preliminary Enquiry'may
reveal their assets, allegations of corruption etc.'.That, since the allegations have
not been substantiated for registering a Regular case, thereby disclosure of the
case details may endanger the life or physical safety of the suspected persons and
cause loss of reputation, if it falls in wrong hands.



Commission is of the considered opinion that the apprehension of the FAA that
disclosure of Preliminary Enquiries may make the suspected persons and
concerned officers vulnerable would have weighed in had the subject matter
pertained to a particular case or a handful of cases. Here, even so, 
RTI Act
 does
not mandate disclosure of intent of RTI Applicants in seeking information,
Appellant has highlighted the issue of lack of transparency and probity in the
domain of Preliminary Enquiries, as these remain distant from public
scrutinyand he has sought for this information in the capacity of an ordinary
citizen, without whatsoever ostensible personal interest. Moreover, Appellant has
sought for the information of cases pertaining to a period of 5 years (2014-18), it
is difficult to imagine how one would narrow down these many cases to pose
endangerment to life and physical safety of the suspects or the concerned
officer(s). Neither the material on record nor the disposition of the Appellant
during hearing suggest any perceivable threat that he can pose to the said
individuals.It will also not be out of place to point out here that there is an
overriding public interest in the disclosure of this information as envisaged
under 
Section 8(2)
 of the RTI Act as it concerns allegations of corruption against
public servants that were enquired into by the premier investigating agencyof
the country for a period of 5 years. Such disclosure will strengthen the structure
of this vital law enforcement arm of the government, per contra, opacity will
only add to casting aspersions on its working.



Commission is piqued by the fact that similar disclosure has been made in the
past in the Annual Report of CBI, as evinced from the Annual Report of 2013, copy
of which was submitted by the Appellant for perusal. Having considered the said

                                         7

 report, Commission finds no reason as to why the Respondent office should deny
disclosure of the limited details sought by the Appellant. Appellant in his wisdom
has made the limited request of information since the stage of First Appeal, yet,
FAA appears to have not even considered the prayer for discussion.



FINAL DECISION

Adverting to the aforesaid observations, Commission directs the CPIO to provide
the Preliminary Enquiry Number, Summary of Allegations, Date of Registration
and Date of Closure of the preliminary enquiries pertaining to allegations of
corruption which have been closed by the agency without registering Regular case
between 2014-2018. The said information may be provided in the form it is
available for the purpose of Annual Report publication. Commission is according
this liberty of severing the names or identifying particulars as per the provision of

Section 10
 of RTI Act in view of the Appellant's limited prayer.



However,having allowed the disclosure in larger public interest as per 
Section 8(2)

of RTI Act, in the event, the said information is not available in the form
requested for by the Appellant, i.e if the summary of Preliminary Enquiries is not
available as per the format used for Annual Reports, then Commission deems it fit
to order inspection of relevant records.The inspection is ordered keeping in view
the fact that in the absence of readily available summary of cases as insisted
upon by the Appellant, preparing the summary of cases will amount to creation
of information which does not conform to 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act in addition to
causing disproportionate diversion of resources of the public authority as per

section 7(9)
 of RTI Act.Therefore, alternatively, CPIO is directed to afford an
adequate opportunity of inspection of the Preliminary Enquiry reports concerning
allegations of corruption for the period between 2014-2018 to the Appellant on a
mutually decided date & time intimated to him telephonically and in writing. Copy
of documents, if desired by the Appellant may be provided free of cost up to 100
pages, and for pages beyond this limit, prescribed fees as per Rule 4 of RTI Rules,
2012 may be sought.



Either one of the aforesaid directions for disclosure, as applicable, shall be
complied within 15 days from the date of receipt of this order and a compliance
report to this effect be duly sent to the Commission by the CPIO.



                                         8


                                              File No : CIC/CBRUI/A/2018/624362

The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                           Divya Prakash Sinha ( द   काश िस हा)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )

Authenticated true copy
(अ भ मा णत स या पत        त)


Haro Prasad Sen
Dy. Registrar
011-26106140/ 
[email protected]

हरो साद सेन,उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक / Date





                                         9