[Cites 
15
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Roshni Joshi vs United Commercial Bank (Uco) on 31 March, 2023


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                         Central Information Commission
                             बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                          Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                          नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/UCOBK/A/2020/672807

Roshni Joshi                                             ......अपीलकता /Appellant


                                        VERSUS
                                         बनाम
CPIO,
UCO Bank, RTI Cell, HRM
Department, Head Office,4th
Floor, 10 BTM SARANI,
Kolkata-700001, West Bengal.                            .... ितवादीगण /Respondent

Date of Hearing                     :   09/01/2023
Date of Decision                    :   24/03/2023

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :              Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on            :   08/04/2020
CPIO replied on                     :   17/04/2020
First appeal filed on               :   20/04/2020
First Appellate Authority's order   :   03/06/2020
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated          :   NIL

Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 08.04.2020 seeking the following
information:

   1. CCTV footage of the place of incident of sexual harassment I.E Service
      Branch, Mumbai for the period 01.06.2019 to 28.02.2020.



                                          1


      1.Copies of complaints, FIRs, and court cases lodged till now, against accused
     HK Arora, Zonal head Mumbai, whether by employee, staff, bank, customer,
     third party or any other judiciary or organization.

     2. Copies of complaints, FIRs, and court cases lodged till now against accused
         Naresh Kumar, GM, HRM, whether by employee, staff, bank, customer,
         third party, or any other judiciary or organization.

     3. Copy of customer complaint of Nerul Branch on the basis of which I got
         suspended just after sexual harassment.

     4. CCTV Footage of Nerul Branch for the period of 15.11.2020 to 10.04.2020,
         where there was ongoing work place harassment just after sexual
         harassment.

     5. copies of all Documents collected by ICC Committee during inquiry.

     6. Status of the fact finding by ICC and its findings till now and PRELIMINARY
         inquiry report (do not confuse with final report)

The CPIO furnished a reply to the appellant on 17.04.2020 stating as under :-



SI. No.    Information sought             Observation/Reply

1.         CCTV footage... Service Branch   Transferred to CPIO at ZO MUMBAI
           Mumbai.... To 28.02.2020         U/S 6(3) ii of 
RTI Act
, 2005

     1.    Copies of ... FIRs, and court cases
                                          Transferred to CPIO at ZO Mumbai U/S
           against.. ZM, Mumbai...          6(3) of 
RTI Act
, 2005

2.                                        Not available with us as the query is
           Copies of... FIRs, and Court cases...

           against.. GM HRM..             relating to records pertaining to
                                          Court(s). Moreover, prima facie it
                                          appears to be personal information.

3.         Copies of customer complaint... Transferred to CPIO at ZO Mumbai U/S
           harassment                     6(3) ii of 
RTI Act
, 2005

4.         CCTV footage.... Harassment      Transferred to CPIO at ZO Mumbai U/S
                                          6(3) ii of 
RTI Act
, 2005

5.         Copies of all...during inquiry   Query is vague/not specific

6.         Status of fact finding....report The report will be provided to the
                                          complainant in due course.



For your Query in point in no. 2, 5 and 6, Please find our above Reply. For the rest
queries, your RTI Application is transferred to the CPIO, at Mumbai Zonal Office
under 
Section 6(3)
ii of the 
RTI Act, 2005
 for disposal."



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 20.04.2020 stating as
under:

      "I work in UCO Bank as a manager. Has been Victim of sexual Harassment,
criminal Conspiracy and Full-fledged Corruption in HEAD OFFICE HRM

                                         2

 DEPARTMENT. CPIO SBN TIWARI is working as chief manager in the same
Department. I have not received single information out of my over 15 number of
RTIs. Information sought is against one of the accused NARESH KUMAR, GM HO,
HRM, under sexual Harassment case, due to whose Corruption, I still am being
harassed by accused. 1. Referring to point no 2 in the reply of said RTI, information
related to FIRs lodged against him by employees, bank, customers is considered to
be professional information. Information given by SBN TIWARI is totally
misleading with the intention to corroborate his senior, under whom he is
working. Information has been malafidely presented in order to protect culprits.

2.with reference to point no 5 mentioned by SBN TIWARI, he is well aware of my
case dealt by ICC for over 5 months now. I have been asking through mails, the
documents collected by ICC with reference to my sexual Harassment case but no
response. As I still am not in receipt of some of the documents presented from my
zonal manager, HK ARORA to ICC COMMITTEE, kindly provide me all set of
documents those collected by ICC with reference to Sexual Harassment case of
mine.

3. In connection with point no 6, mentioned in reply to RTI, no action has been
taken by the committee though after passage of 5 months, by brazenly violating
POSH ACT 2013 guidelines of mandatory completion of inquiry and report within
90 days. This calls for penalty to be imposed on CORRUPT ICC MEMBERS.
But this as well has not been done. Instead of producing final report within 90
days, not even preliminary report has been given to me. It is really important for
me to expose their huge Corruption in terms of all sexual Harassment cases. Even
after passage of 5 months, I am getting reply of the committee will present report
in due course is completely malafied and misleading information. All top
executives are playing with my life."



FAA's order dated 03.06.2020, held as under:-



"I being the Appellate Authority, have examined your application and found that
your application has already been disposed of by the CPIO on 17.04.2020.



However, we reply on point No. 2: The information sought by you is personal and
cannot be provided
 u/s 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act, 2005.



Reply to query No. 3: CPIO has confirmed that the required documents will be
submitted in due course after the completion of the process which got delayed due
to outbreak of COVID-19."



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, the appellant approached the Commission with
the instant Second Appeal stating inter alia as under:

                                         3


        "....And how can even CPIO term this data as personal information, having
no larger public interest where fate of all women employees of the bank area
concerned by the data saught. This excuse is laughable on part of CPIO who has no
explanation to offer the reasons ststed. On the contrary, the data saught has huge
significance with regard to exposing their illegal practices being performed
brutally in the bank. It is to substantiate my case where I have made official
WHISTLEBLOWER Complaint and criminal case against Sexual assault and said
corrupt practices against said parties. It is to safeguard rights of all women
employees, to help them secure their right to work with dignity, right to life and
liberty, right of principle of natural justice. Which has got tremendous public
interest, such as the information must furnised so quickly without killing more
time otherwise they will devastate my career and life. Access of Service folders by
the victim, of all those accused and aiding accused in any manner, in her own
case, having larger interest to expose their possible involvement in other larger
conspiracies, which might have been kept concerned from the eyes of other
innocent women employees, in order to promote their dirty business. After already
knowing all these, Instead of extending any co operation, I am being tortured to
the extent of termination. CPIO SBN TIWARI is an accomplice of corrupt GM,
Naresh Kumar, who has been adding to my woes. He has been denying
information on every RTI of over 30 RTIs filed by me. He has added to my troubles
and loss of peace, causing me to suffer detriment to right to work, right to liberty
and life by whole hearted deliberate attempts to conceal all the records. Huge
penalty must be imposed on highly corrupt CPIO SBN Tiwari, in order to cause me
mental trauma, troubles and malafied misuse of RTI ACT."



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Present through audio conference.

Respondent: Khushi Ram, AGM & CPIO present through audio conference.



The Appellant was heard at length during the course of which she desired to
narrate in detail the factual background of the information sought for in the RTI
Application as well as the entire timeline of the alleged sexual harassment case
being pursued by her. While the Commission continued to hear her submissions,
she was counselled about the scope and mandate of the 
RTI Act
 which did not
warrant a threadbare analysis of the said factual background or the gamut of
questions and dissatisfaction she stated to be having with the action taken by the
Respondent Bank in the matter of the alleged sexual harassment. However, she


                                         4

 burst into frenzied arguments expressing her discontent with the hearing
proceedings and demanded to be heard in the manner she deemed as fit.



The CPIO reiterated the contents of his written submissions stating against each
point of the RTI Application as under:



      "Point No.1-Vide on e-mail dated 05.05.2020 (copy enclosed), the CPIO,
Zonal Office, Mumbai has informed that no information for the period w.e.f.
09.09.2019 to 31.12.2019 is available because the relevant hard-disk is in custody
of the Police Authority. He further submitted that the CCTV footage from
01.05.2019 to 31.08.2019 and the information from 01.01.2020 to 28.02.2020 of
Nerul Branch was sought to be exempted under 
Section 8(1)(d)
 and also on the
ground that the same will endanger lives of Bank employees working in the
concerned branch.



      Point No. I & 2- The information sought by the Applicant is vague and not
decipherable. The information sought is not in possession of the Bank, rother, if
only, such cases or complaints are being filed are to be available with the
respective authority/court. Further, the information appears to be personal in
nature.



      Point No.3-The information cannot be disclosed as the disclosure of the
same is exempted from disclosure u/s 
Section 8(1)(e)
, 
8(1)(g)
, 
8(1)(h)
 and 
8(1)(j)
 of
RTI Act, 2005.



      Point No.4- The period is not clear.



      Point No.5 & 6- The copy of report along with all annexures provided to the
RTI Applicant on 22.01.2021 & 22.02.2021."



Upon a further query from the Commission regarding the probability of parting
with the information available for point no.3 of the RTI Application in terms of the
complaint against the Appellant, if any, after redacting the portions that are hit
by the exemptions of 
Section 8(1)(g)
 of the RTI Act, the CPIO replied in
affirmative.



The hearing was concluded after reserving the decision in the matter.



Decision:



                                         5


 In view of the hearing proceedings, the Commission deems it fit to verbatim
quote the contents of the written submissions (17 pages excluding enclosures)
filed by the Appellant on 17.01.2023 (common to 9 of her Appeals that were
listed for hearing in a bunch manner), of which, the factual background is being
quoted only to the extent that provides a gist of the narrative, as other details
bear sensitive information related to the case averred to be put forth to the
Internal Complaints Committee of the Respondent Bank and other concerned
competent authorities:



        "1. In UCO Bank fence is eating crops! At the outset, the instant case is in
respect of one malaise, "Corruption " - the cancer at the heart of so many
problems that has been plaguing the Indian Banking System, particularly the
Public Sector Banks. The illegal & unethical practices flourishing in UCO Bank and
the relentless harassment and irreparable detriment caused, constrained me to
file as many as nine appeals before the CIC. This case is a jarring example of how
conscious efforts to scuttle the investigation, thereby stifling the complaints of
grievous nature and brow-beating of a whistle-blower, have been made in a
recurring manner, by certain top- executives of the respondent bank. Respondents
allegedly abused their powers and misused their positions in harbouring one
another, thereby, committing various offences, inter alia offences of perpetrating
corrupt practices, criminal conspiracy, cheating, forgery, using fabricated
documents as genuine, and offences involving moral turpitude, liable to be
punished under the various Indian laws, in order to ensure that their nefarious
activities, inter alia abuse of powers, enabling of sexual harassment and
perpetrating cruelties on employees of the respondent bank could go unchecked
without any hindrance.

        2. The instant case is a glaring example of relentless persecution of a
woman employee of a Public Sector Bank, who has been taken in reprisal, thereby
converting entire machinery available at disposal of respondent bank, into an
instrument to harbour perpetrators & settle personal score by the means of
frequent transfers, arbitrary suspensions, spoiling her career and disqualifying her
from the promotion, bombarding her with plethora of forged and fabricated
show- causes, reminders, notices and as many as three fabricated charge- sheets
basing outright fictitious and fabricated complaints cropped up against her,
illegally removing her from services of UCO Bank, hounding her with carrying out
perennial and everlasting inquires thereby keeping such departmental
proceedings at abeyance for an indefinite period, all this to her, only because she
opposed & acted against the sexual advances of a stalwart union leader of the
bank and blew whistles in discharge of her duties as a banker, against corrupt
practices being carried out in respondent bank.



                                         6


       xxx


       30. The gist of aforementioned facts have been brought out succinctly in the
following words: In pursuance of alleged incident of sexual harassment, Mr.
Harmohan Arora, Mr. Naresh kumar & Mr. Atul Kumar Goel allegedly in complicity
with the AIBOC Leaders, among other conspirators hatched a criminal conspiracy
against me, thereby colluding with one another, they attempted to muzzle the
complaints of grievous nature filed against them, throw me out of bank's
premises, forcibly transferred and illegally suspended my service, cropped up
forged and fabricated complaints, dodged my requests to provide copies of crucial
pieces of evidence, and cropped up as many as three (03) bogus inquiries against
me, with an ulterior motive of wielding quasi-judicial powers, as a tool for a witch-
hunt and a means to ensure that a pendora's box is not opened. I was allegedly
faced with gang of powerful leaders and executives, who in order favour
perpetrators abused their powers recurrently, and illegally threw me out of the
services, that caused me a wrongful loss to the tune of 20 lakh approx. in terms of
emoluments, & also caused irreparable harm to my body, mind and reputation;
that I was removed from the bank's service without passing any final Order w. r. t
the inquiry proceedings conducted into the allegations of sexual harassment; that
at the same, time, all the complaints alleging said top executives of the bank of
having committed various corrupt activities, are pending for their disposal at UCO
bank's end, and thereby suppressing material facts stated therein the said
complaints, I have been illegally removed from the service, just to ensure that
pendora's box is not opened. A Writ petition to this effect bearing Ref. No.
5092/2021 has been filed before the Bombay High Court.



At the very outset, the Commission notes that the information sought for by the
Appellant at points 1,2 & 4 of the RTI Application is speculative in nature,
particularly points 1 & 2 also involve third party's personal information that
stands exempted from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act. 
In this
regard, the attention of the Appellant is further drawn towards a judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of Central Public Information Officer,
Supreme Court of 
India Vs. Subhash Chandra Agarwal
 in Civil Appeal No. 10044
of 2010 with Civil Appeal No. 10045 of 2010 and Civil Appeal No. 2683 of 2010
wherein the import of "personal information" envisaged under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of
RTI Act has been exemplified in the context of earlier ratios 
laid down by
 the
same Court in the matter(
s) of Canara Bank Vs. C.S. Shyam
 in Civil Appeal No.22
of 2009; 
Girish Ramchandra Deshpande vs. Central Information Commissioner &



                                         7

 Ors.
, (2013) 1 SCC 212 and R.K. Jain vs. Union of India & Anr., (2013) 14 SCC 794.
The following was thus held:




       "59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion, would
indicate that personal records, including name, address, physical, mental and
psychological status, marks obtained, grades and answer sheets, are all treated as
personal information. Similarly, professional records, including qualification,
performance, evaluation reports, ACRs, disciplinary proceedings, etc. are all
personal information. Medical records, treatment, choice of medicine, list of
hospitals and doctors visited, findings recorded, including that of the family
members, information relating to assets, liabilities, income tax returns, details of
investments, lending and borrowing, etc. are personal information. Such personal
information is entitled to protection from unwarranted invasion of privacy and
conditional access is available when stipulation of larger public interest is
satisfied. This list is indicative and not exhaustive..."



Similarly, a bare perusal of the grounds of the Appellant's dissatisfaction as
communicated through her appeal grounds as well as her written submissions
suggest that she is questioning the merits of the action/inaction of the
Respondent office against her sexual harassment complaint; merits of the
suspension order issued to her and issues related thereto. None of these aspects
of the case are amenable to the jurisdiction of the Commission under the 
RTI Act

or are answerable by the CPIO within his mandate under the Act. Here, the
Appellant is advised about the powers of the Commission under the 
RTI Act
 by
relying on certain precedents of the superior Courts as under:



The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of 
Hansi Rawat and Anr. v. Punjab
National Bank and Ors. (LPA No.785/2012
) dated 11.01.2013 has held as under:


 
"6. ....proceedings under the 
RTI Act
 cannot be converted into
     proceedings for adjudication of disputes as to the correctness of the
     information furnished."(Emphasis Supplied)

The aforesaid rationale finds resonance in another judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi
High Court in the matter of 
Govt. of NCT of Delhi vs. Rajender Prasad (W.P.[C
]
10676/2016) dated 30.11.2017 wherein it was held as under:




      "6. The CIC has been constituted under 
Section 12
 of the Act and the powers
      of CIC are delineated under the Act. The CIC being a statutory body has to
      act strictly within the confines of the Act and is neither required to nor has
      the jurisdiction to examine any other controversy or disputes."

                                         8


 
While, the Apex Court in the matter of 
Union of India vs Namit Sharma (Review
Petition [C] No.2309
 of 2012) dated 03.09.2013 observed as under:




      "20. ...While deciding whether a citizen should or should not get a particular
      information "which is held by or under the control of any public authority",
      the Information Commission does not decide a dispute between two or
      more parties concerning their legal rights other than their right to get
      information in possession of a public authority...." (Emphasis Supplied)

Nonetheless, as a matter of limited relief, the Commission directs the CPIO to
revisit point no.3 of the RTI Application and ascertain if the available information
can be supplied after redacting the portions that are exempt under 
Section
8(1)(g)
 of the RTI Act. The redaction of records, if any, shall be carried out in
consonance with 
Section 10
 of the RTI Act. A revised reply to this effect shall be
provided to the Appellant by the CPIO within 15 days from the date of receipt of
this order under due intimation to the Commission.



                      The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                   Saroj Punhani (सरोज पुनहािन)
                                                                          हािन)
                                         Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स#यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                         9