[Cites 
9
, Cited by 
2
]




Central Information Commission


Ashutosh Gautam vs Central Information Commission on 16 January, 2023


Author: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


Bench: 
Neeraj Kumar Gupta


                            के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                     Central Information Commission
                        बाबा गंगनाथ माग,मुिनरका
                      Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                      नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067

ि तीय अपील सं या/Second Appeal Nos. CIC/CICOM/A/2021/662231
िशकायत सं या / Complaint No. CIC/CICOM/C/2020/662210

Mr. Ashutosh Gautam                                   ... अपीलकता/Appellant
                                                      ....Complainant

                                   VERSUS
                                    बनाम

The CPIO                                              ... ितवादी/Respondent
Central Information Commission
Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
New Delhi-110067

Relevant dates emerging from the appeal/complaint:-

                                                          SA & Complaint
RTI : 21-09-2019             FA    : 22-10-2019
                                                          : 03-02-2020
CPIO : 27-09-2019            FAO : 09-12-2019             Hearing : 29-12-2022

                                  ORDER

1.      The appellant/complainant filed an application under the 
Right to
Information Act, 2005
 
(RTI Act
) before the Central Public Information Officer
(CPIO),      Central    Information    Commission,     New       Delhi.    The
appellant/complainant is seeking information on various points including inter-
alia is as under :-



                                                                      Page 1 of 7


 2.    The CPIO vide letter dated 27-09-2019 has given reply to the appellant.
Being dissatisfied with the same, the appellant had filed first appeal dated 22-10-
2019 and requested that the information should be provided to him. The FAO
vide order dated 09-12-2019 the CPIO, RTI Cell is directed to furnish the
information if in available in his custody within 15 days of receipt order of
decision and disposed the appeal. He has filed a second appeal before the
Commission on the ground that information sought has not been provided to him
and requested to direct the respondent to provide complete and correct
information.



Hearing:



3.     The appellant/complainant was not present in the hearing. The respondent,
Shri Sharad Kumar, DR, Shri Babu Lal, SO, Shri Devender Kumar, SO, Shri
Chandan Kumar, ASO, Shri B S Kasana, DR, Shri S C Sharma, DR and Shri A
K Assija, DR were personally present in the hearing.

4.     The appellant/complainant vide his e-mail has requested for adjournment
in the above mentioned cases. The request of the appellant/complainant cannot
be adhered to.

5.     The respondent is agreed for adjudication of both the cases together, as the
subject-matter is identical in nature.

6.     The respondent submitted that w.r.t the information sought by the
appellant/complainant in Box A as mentioned in the RTI application, the
reply/information on point nos. 1 to 3 was provided to him vide letter dated
15.10.2019. On point nos. 4 and 5, reply/information was provided on
07.09.2022. On point nos. 6 to 8, reply/information was provided to the
appellant/complainant on 26.06.2019 and 31.10.2019. On point nos. 9(a) to (d)
and 10 (1) to (4), reply/information was provided to him on 17.12.2019. On point
no. 11, reply was provided to the appellant/complainant on 09.10.2019. On point
no. 12, reply was given vide letter dated 15.10.2019. The respondent further

                                                                         Page 2 of 7

 submitted that w.r.t information sought by the appellant/complainant in Box B
and Box C as mentioned in the RTI application, the reply/information was
provided to him vide letter dated 09.10.2019. The respondent further submitted
that they have also complied the directions given by the FAA and again sent the
reply/information on point no. 8 of Box B vide their letter dated 13.07.2020. The
replies were seen during the hearing, which were seen during the hearing.



Decision:

7.     The Commission, after hearing the submissions of the respondent and after
perusal of records, observes that the respondent has provided complete point-wise
reply/information to the appellant/complainant on his above mentioned RTI
application as per the documents available on record and as per the provisions of
the 
RTI Act
.

8.     Therefore, there are no sufficient ground to take action against the
respondent under 
Section 18
 of the RTI Act. Therefore, no case of penalty has
been made out, as the respondent has not obstructed any information with
malafide intention.

9.     The Commission further observes that the appellant/complainant is seeking
information on multiple issues in one RTI Application. The Commission observes
that the appellant/complainant has sought unrelated information in each point
which is not appreciated in the spirit of the 
RTI Act
. The appellant/complainant
is supposed to seek specific query/ information as per the provisions of the 
RTI
Act
. The Commission further observed that some queries of the
appellant/complainant are situational based queries on different subject-matters
and the queries are non-specific and general in nature. But the CPIO is not
supposed to create information; or to interpret information; or to furnish
clarification to the appellant/complainant under the ambit of the 
RTI Act
. As per

Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, the reasons/opinions/advices can only be provided to
the applicants if it is available on record of the public authority. The CPIO cannot
create information in the manner as sought by the appellant/complainant. The
CPIO is only a communicator of information based on the records held in the
office and hence, he cannot expected to do research work to deduce anything from
the material therein and then supply it to him.

10. In this regard, the Commission refers to the definition of 'information' u/s

Section 2(f)
 of the RTI Act, 2005 which is reproduced below:



     "information" means any material in any form, including records,
     documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars,
     orders, logbooks, contracts, report, papers, samples, models, data material


                                                                          Page 3 of 7

      held in any electronic form and information relating to any private body
     which can be accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time
     being in force."

In this context a reference was made to the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in
2011 (8) SCC 497 (
CBSE and Anr. Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay and Ors
),
wherein it was held as under:


       35 "A Public Authority is also not required to furnish information which
       require drawing of inferences and/or making assumptions. It is also not
       required to provide 'advice' or 'opinion' to an applicant, nor required to
       obtain and furnish any 'opinion' or 'advice' to an applicant. The reference
       to 'opinion' or 'advice' n the definition of 'information' in 
section 2(f)
 of
       the Act, only refers to such material available in the records of the public
       authority. Many public authorities have, as a public relation exercise,
       provide advice, guidance and opinion to the citizens. But that is purely
       voluntary and should not be confused with any obligation under the 
RTI
       Act
."

Furthermore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Khanapuram Gandaiah
Vs. Administrative Officer and Ors. Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.34868
OF 2009 (Decided on January 4, 2010) had held as under:

       6. "....
Under the RTI Act
 "information" is defined under 
Section 2(f)
 which
       provides:

       "information" means any material in any form, including records,
       documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars,
       orders, logbooks, contracts, report, papers, samples, models, data material
       held in any electronic form and information relating to any private body
       which can be accessed by a public authority under any other law for the
       time being in force."

       This definition shows that an applicant under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act can
       get any information which is already in existence and accessible to the
       public authority under law. Of course, under the 
RTI Act
 an applicant is
       entitled to get copy of the opinions, advices, circulars, orders, etc., but he
       cannot ask for any information as to why such opinions, advices, circulars,
       orders, etc. have been passed."

       7. "....the Public Information Officer is not supposed to have any material
       which is not before him; or any information he could have obtained under
       law. Under 
Section 6
 of the RTI Act, an applicant is entitled to get only
       such information which can be accessed by the "public authority" under
       any other law for the time being in force. The answers sought by the
       petitioner in the application could not have been with the public authority

                                                                           Page 4 of 7

       nor could he have had access to this information and Respondent No. 4
      was not obliged to give any reasons as to why he had taken such a decision
      in the matter which was before him."

Similarly, the High Court of Bombay in 
Dr. Celsa Pinto, Ex-Officio Joint
Secretary (School Education) vs The Goa State Information Commission
 on
3 April, 2008 (2008 (110) Bom L R 1238) had held as under:


      "
Section 2(f)
 -Information means any material in any form, including
      records, documents, memos e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases,
      circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models,
      data material held in any electronic form and information relating to any
      private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other
      law for the time being in force; The definition cannot include within its fold
      answers to the question why which would be the same thing as asking the
      reason for a justification for a particular thing. The Public Information
      Authorities cannot expect to communicate to the citizen the reason why a
      certain thing was done or not done in the sense of a justification because
      the citizen makes a requisition about information. Justifications are matter
      within the domain of adjudicating authorities and cannot properly be
      classified as information."

      The definition cannot include within its fold answers to the question why
      which would be the same thing as asking the reason for a justification for
      a particular thing. The Public Information Authorities cannot expect to
      communicate to the citizen the reason why a certain thing was done or not
      done in the sense of a justification because the citizen makes a requisition
      about information. Justifications are matter within the domain of
      adjudicating authorities and cannot properly be classified as
      information."

11. The Commission further observed that the appellant/complainant has
sought voluminous information related to the functioning of the public authority.
The information sought is voluminous in nature and may not be readily available
with the CPIO in the manner as sought by the appellant/complainant, collating
and compiling of which would disproportionately divert the resources of the
respondent organization. Hence, the disclosure of information is exempted as per

Section 7(9)
 of the RTI Act. Moreover, the Commission referred to the decision
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in 
Central Board of Secondary
Education and Anr. Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay and Ors
, SLP(C) NO.
7526/2009 wherein it was held as under:


          "Indiscriminate and impractical demands or directions under 
RTI
          Act
 for disclosure of all and sundry information (unrelated to

                                                                          Page 5 of 7

           transparency and accountability in the functioning of public authorities
          and eradication of corruption) would be counter-productive as it will
          adversely affect the efficiency of the administration and result in the
          executive getting bogged down with the non-productive work of
          collecting and furnishing information. 
The Act
 should not be allowed
          to be misused or abused, to become a tool to obstruct the national
          development and integration, or to destroy the peace, tranquility and
          harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be converted into a tool of
          oppression or intimidation of honest officials striving to do their duty.
          The nation does not want a scenario where 75% of the staff of public
          authorities spends 75% of their time in collecting and furnishing
          information to applicants instead of discharging their regular duties.
          The threat of penalties under the 
RTI Act
 and the pressure of the
          authorities under the 
RTI Act
 should not lead to employees of public
          authorities prioritising 'information furnishing' at the cost of their
          normal and regular duties."

Furthermore, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of ICAI vs. Shaunak H.
Satya (2011) 8 SCC 781 dated 02.09.2011 had held as under:

          "26. We however agree that it is necessary to make a distinction in
          regard to information intended to bring transparency, to improve
          accountability and to reduce corruption, falling under 
Section 4(1)(b)

          and (c) and other information which may not have a bearing on
          accountability or reducing corruption. The competent authorities under
          the 
RTI Act
 will have to maintain a proper balance so that while
          achieving transparency, the demand for information does not reach
          unmanageable proportions affecting other public interests, which
          include efficient operation of public authorities and government,
          preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information and optimum
          use of limited fiscal resources"

12. The Commission further observed that in 
Shail Sahni Vs. Sanjeev Kumar
& Ors.
 in W.P.(C) No. 845 of 2014, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court has held that
"misuse of the 
RTI Act
 has to be appropriately dealt with, otherwise the public
would lose faith and confidence in this "sunshine Act". A beneficent Statute, when
made a tool for mischief and abuse must be checked in accordance with law."


13. In view of the above matrix, the Commission is of the opinion that though
the queries of the appellant/complainant are not supposed to be dealt with as per
the provisions of the 
RTI Act
 and the reply of the CPIO and FAA are being upheld
by the Commission.



                                                                         Page 6 of 7


 14. The appellant/complainant is aggrieved with the old decisions of the
Commission and instead of filing non-compliance petitions/judicial recourse, the
appellant/complainant had filed multiple RTI applications and now when the
cases are listed he is not bothered to contest his cases and sought adjournment in
the present cases twice. The request of the appellant/complainant w.r.t
adjournment cannot be adhered to. He is advised to approach appropriate forum
in order to resolve his grievances.

15. No further intervention of the Commission is required in the matter.

16. With the above observations, the complaint and appeal are disposed of.

17. Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.



                                       Neeraj Kumar Gupta (नीरज कु मार गु ा)
                                     Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )

                                                        दनांक / Date : 13.01.2023
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स यािपत  ित)


S. C. Sharma (एस. सी. शमा),
Dy. Registrar (उप-पंजीयक),
(011-26105682)




Addresses of the parties:



1.    The CPIO
      Central Information Commission
      Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
      New Delhi-110067


2.    Mr. Ashutosh Gautam





                                                                        Page 7 of 7