[Cites 
8
, Cited by 
0
]




Central Information Commission


Samir Sardana vs Punjab National Bank on 5 November, 2021


Author: 
Suresh Chandra


Bench: 
Suresh Chandra


                                        के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                               Central Information Commission
                                    बाबा गंगनाथ माग ,मुिनरका
                                Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                                   नई  द ली, New Delhi - 110067

िशकायत सं या / Complaint No. CIC/PNBNK/C/2019/660829

Samir Sardana                                                ...िशकायतकता/Complainant

                                          VERSUS
                                           बनाम

CPIO: Punjab National Bank,
New Delhi.                                                   ... ितवादीगण /Respondents

Relevant dates emerging from the complaint:

RTI : 15.10.2019                 FA     : 23.12.2019              Complaint : 26.12.2019

CPIO : No Reply                  FAO : No Order                   Hearing   : 28.09.2021


                                           CORAM:
                                     Hon'ble Commissioner
                                   SHRI SURESH CHANDRA
                                          ORDER

                                         (03.10.2021)


1.          The issues under consideration i.e. the reliefs sought by the complainant in his
complaint dated 26.12.2019 due to alleged non-supply of information vide his RTI
application dated 15.10.2019 are as under:-

     (i)       Impose maximum Penalty, on the PIO under 
Section 20(1)
, of the RTI
               Act,2005;

     (ii)      Dismissal of the PIO (under the Ministry of Finance Rules and the Code of
               Conduct for Bank staff and other officers laid down by the Ministry of Finance)
               for illegal and mala fide action, and also under the Punjab National Bank
               Service Rules- which has several provisions for the same;

                                                                                      Page 1 of 17


      (iii)    Administrative action and/strictures, against the PIO (under 
Section 20(2)
, of
              the RTI Act,2005, and also under the Punjab National Bank service rules which
              has several provisions for the same;

     (iv)     Recommendation to the Ministry of Finance for administrative action
              and/strictures, against the PIO;

     (v)      Direct the Respondents to refund the Application fee paid by Complainant
              while submitting RTI Application, as per section (7)(6) of the 
RTI Act
;

     (vi)     Invoke its powers under the 
RTI Act
 to issue any other direction or
              recommendation as it may deem appropriate;

     (vii) Direct the public authority to make entry in Service Book/Annual Performance
              Appraisal Report of the Respondents for defying the provisions of the Act
              (under the Punjab National Bank Service Rules- which has several provisions
              for the same);

     (viii) Compensate the Complainant.

2.         Succinctly facts of the case are that the complainant filed an application dated
15.10.2019 under the 
Right to Information Act, 2005
 
(RTI Act
) before the Central Public
Information Officer (CPIO), Punjab National Bank, New Delhi, seeking information
which is reproduced as under:

"The following information was sought from the CPIO of the bank with respect to the
bank operation in the MUDRA scheme:

     (i) NPAs
              • NPA in the 3 categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun) of Mudra loans o/s as
                 at March 31, 2019, in terms of number and amount
                    o PIO to confirm that the list of NPA Accounts by name and value and
                       geography is available in electronic format
              • W.r.t. the above NPA loans in each of the 3 categories, the ageing in terms
                 of the number of years for which the accounts are NPA (as at March 31,
                 2019) - by number and value


                                                                                    Page 2 of 17

       o Less than 1 year
      o 1 - 2 years
      o 2-3 years
      o 3-4 years
• W.r.t. the above NPA loans in each of the 3 categories, the nature for the
   accounts which are NPA (as at March 31, 2019) by number and value
      o Male and Female
      o Minorities and Non-Minorities
      o SC-ST and General
      o OBC and General
• W.r.t. the above NPA loans (as at March 31, 2019) in each of the above said
   3 categories, the ageing in terms of the number of years, from when the loan
   was "sanctioned" (as opposed to when the loan became an NPA in point 2
   above)
      o FY 2015
      o FY 2016
      o FY 2017
      o FY 2018
      o FY 2019
• W.r.t. the above NPA loans (as at March 31, 2019) in each of the 3
   categories, the state wise distribution of the NPA is sought for the Top 15
   states by value and number of NPA accounts separately for the Bank
• W.r.t. the above NPA loans (as at March 31, 2019) in each of the 3
   categories, the district wise distribution of the NPA is sought for the Top 15
   districts by value and number of NPA accounts separately for the Bank
• PIO to confirm that the eligibility condition for the Mudra loans excludes
   previous defaulters, from the bank within a particular time period or for a
   time period
      o In addition, if Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the technology
         system and platform used to verify and authenticate the same

                                                                      Page 3 of 17

 • PIO to confirm that the eligibility condition for the Mudra loans excludes previous
       borrowers of Mudra loans from the bank within a particular time period or for a
       time period
                o In addition, If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the technology
                     system and platform used to verify and authenticate the same
• PIO to confirm that the eligibility condition for the Mudra loans excludes previous
       borrowers of Mudra loans from other banks within a particular time period or for
       a time period
                o In, addition, If Yes, the PIO to provide the name of the technology
                     system and platform used to verify and authenticate the same
• PIO to confirm that the eligibility condition for the Mudra loans excludes previous
       other borrowers of Mudra loans from the bank with the same address as the
       proposed borrower, within a particular time period or for a time period
                o In addition, if yes, the PIO to provide the name of the technology
                     system and platform used to verify and authenticate the same

(ii)     Disbursals
• PIO to provide the aggregate of the loan disbursals (on all India basis) in the 3
       categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun) of Mudra loans for the last 4 financial
       years, in terms of number and amount
• PIO to provide the aggregate of the loan disbursals (for the top 10 states by value
       and number of borrowers) in the 3 categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun) of
       Mudra loans for the last 4 financial years, in terms of number and amount
• PIO to provide the aggregate of the loan disbursals (for the top 20 districts by
       value and number of borrowers) in the 3 categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun) of
       Mudra loans for the last 3 financial years, in terms of number and amount
• PIO to confirm that the disbursal of Shishu loans are made on outright basis or on
       re-imbursement node or direct payments to suppliers/vendors
                o If on outright basis, PIO to confirm that the borrower has to provide
                     proof of expenditure on self attestation basis or on declaration and/or
                     certification

                                                                                  Page 4 of 17

            o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the Bank has
              no proof of expenditure
           o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the Bank has
              no self attested/certified proof of expenditure
           o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the Bank has
              no 3rd party attested/certified proof of expenditure
• PIO to confirm that the disbursal of Kishor loans are made on outright basis or
   on re-imbursement node or direct payments to suppliers/vendors
      o If on outright basis, PIO to confirm that the borrower has to provide proof
         of expenditure on self attestation basis or on declaration and/or
         certification
      o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the bank has no
         proof of expenditure
      o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the bank has no self
         attested/certified proof of expenditure
      o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the bank has no 3rd
         party attested/certified proof of expenditure
• PIO to confirm that the disbursal of Tarun loans are made on outright basis or on
   re-imbursement node or direct payments to suppliers/vendors
      o If on outright basis, PIO to confirm that the borrower has to provide proof
         of expenditure on self attestation basis or on declaration and/or
         certification
      o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the bank has no
         proof of expenditure
      o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the bank has no self
         attested/certified proof of expenditure
      o PIO to provide the number of loan accounts for which the bank has no 3rd
         party attested/certified proof of expenditure.



                                                                         Page 5 of 17


 (iii)        Tarun and Kishor Loans
 • W.r.t the Tarun and Kishor loans, separately, the PIO to provide the details of the
        number and value of loans o/s as at March 31, 2019, provided to 1st time
        entrepreneurs for each sector (as the sector of application of loan would be stated
        in the application form and the Project Report)
 • W.r.t the Tarun and Kishor loans, separately, the PIO to provide the details of the
        number and value of loans o/s as at March 31, 2019, provided to Existing
        Businesses of entrepreneurs for each sector (as the sector of application of loan
        would be stated in the application form and the Project Report)
 • W.r.t the NPA accounts related to Tarun and Kishor loans, separately, the PIO to
        provide the details of the number and value of loans o/s as at March 31, 2019,
        provided to 1st time entrepreneurs
 • W.r.t the NPA accounts related to Tarun and Kishor loans, separately, the PIO to
        provide the details of the number and value of loans o/s as at March 31, 2019,
        provided to the existing business of entrepreneurs
 • W.r.t the Loan accounts related to Tarun and Kishor loans for 1st time
        entrepreneurs, separately, the PIO to provide the details of the number and value
        of loans o/s ,as at March 31, 2019, provided for the following purposes, as
        sanctioned and/or disbursed
           o Working Capital
           o Asset Creation
           o Operating Expense
           o Refinancing Interest
           o Marketing Expense
           o Maintenance costs
           o Offset Losses and Write Offs
• W.r.t the Loan accounts related to Tarun and Kishor loans for existing businesses
    of entrepreneurs, separately, the PIO to provide the details of the number and
    value of loans o/s as at March 31, 2019, provided for the following purposes, as
    sanctioned and/or disbursed

                                                                                 Page 6 of 17

           o Working Capital
          o Asset Creation
          o Operating Expense
          o Refinancing Interest
          o Marketing Expense
          o Maintenance costs
          o Offset Losses and Write Offs

(iv)         Proof of expenditure
• PIO to confirm w.r.t the aggregate NPA loans o/s (by value) in each of the 3 loan
       categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun), as at March 31,2019, the following
       information
          o Value of disbursals for which there is no proof of expenditure at all
          o Value of disbursals for which there is proof of expenditure in terms of self
             certification only
          o Value of disbursals for which there is proof of expenditure in terms of 3rd
             party certification only
          o Value of disbursals for which there is proof of expenditure in terms of bills
             and invoices only



(v) Wilful defaulters and suits filed or recovery initiated cases
• PIO to provide w.r.t the aggregate MUDRA loans o/s (by value and number) in
       the 3 loan categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun),as at March 31, 2019, declared
       by the bank as wilful defaulters
• PIO to provide w.r.t the aggregate MUDRA loans o/s (by value and number) in
       the 3 loan categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun), as at March 31, 2019, w.r.t
       which the bank has initiated recovery proceedings of any sort

(vi)         Technology/ERP Platforms
         • W.r.t the MUDRA loan disbursals made by the Bank, the PIO is to confirm
             the following :



                                                                               Page 7 of 17


              o That Each loan account is entered into the Bank's Databases and
                ERP with the name of borrower, address, type of loan and loan
                account number
             o PIO to provide a sample copy of the Data entry format used to make
                the loan disbursal entry into the Bank ERP and Bank IT Databases
                for each of the 3 Mudra loan types
        • W.r.t. the 3 types of Mudra Loans disbursed by the bank, the PIO is to
          provide the following data
                o A screen shot of 3 sample loan accounts of the 3 types of loan
                   accounts as displayed in the loans or borrower module /section of
                   the Banks ERP/IT databases/systems
                o If the bank so desires - it can blank out the names of the borrower
                   and the address of the borrower as also the photos of the
                   borrowers

(vii)     Banks and 3rd party services
        • PIO to confirm that it provides assistance to MUDRA borrowers to fill in
          the application and prepare a Tentative or Detailed Project Report
             o If Yes, the PIO to provide 3 sample application forms and 3 Tentative
                Project Reports which the bank assisted the MUDRA borrowers to
                prepare in the 3 types of MUDRA loans
        • PIO to confirm the number and value of MUDRA loans disbursed (in the
          last 4 years in the aggregate) for cases wherein the MUDRA borrowers
          used NGOs and other agencies to prepare the application form and the
          Tentative or Detailed Project Report, as also, to complete other formalities
          with the bank, for the sanction and disbursal of the MUDRA loan
             o PIO to provide 3 sample application forms and 3 Tentative Project
                Reports which the said NGOs and other agencies, assisted the
                MUDRA borrowers to prepare, in the 3 types of MUDRA loans





                                                                            Page 8 of 17


 (viii)      Repeat borrowers
         • PIO to confirm w.r.t the aggregate loans o/s (by value) in the 3 loan
            categories(Shishu, Kishor and Tarun),as at March 31, 2019, the following
            information
                 o Number and value of loans to repeat borrowers who made no loan
                    defaults
                 o Number and value of loans to repeat borrowers who made some loan
                    defaults

(ix)        Procedures
         • PIO to provide the loan application form and Project Report format and
            disbursal guidelines w.r.t the Shishu, Tarun and Kishor loans - and direct
            the applicant if the said information is available on an authentic mode, on a
            GOI portal on the web

(x) Statistics
         • PIO to confirm that it has information w.r.t the aggregate number of
            MUDRA enterprise units in operation in various districts of India, as at
            March 31, 2019, even on a deductive basis (id.est., assuming that the Non-


            NPAs are operational enterprise units)

(xi)        Audits and inspections
         • PIO to confirm that the Bank has carried out or funded the audit of the
            sanctions and disbursals of MUDRA loans by the Bank , at any time in the
            last 5 years
                 o If Yes, the nature, year, scope of audit and name of audit agency
                 o If Yes, the PIO to confirm that it has a copy of the said audit reports
                    and that they are in e-format
                 o If Not, the bank to provide the name of the Public Authority which has
                    the information w.r.t the said audit, if any, carried out
         • PIO to confirm that the CAG has carried out the audit of the sanctions and
            disbursals of MUDRA loans by the Bank, at any time in the last 5 years
                 o If Yes, the nature, year, scope of audit and name of audit agency

                                                                                Page 9 of 17

                     o If Yes, the PIO to confirm that the Bank has a copy of the said audit
                       reports and that they are in e-format
              • PIO to confirm that the Bank or the disbursing bankers have used any
                 agency or statistician to ascertain the end use of the Mudra loans in any
                 geography in the last 5 years
                    o If Yes, the nature, year, scope of assignment and name of agency
                    o If Yes, the PIO to confirm that it has a copy of the said analytical or
                       statistical reports and that they are in e-format
                    o If Not, the Bank to provide the name of the Public Authority which
                       has the information w.r.t the said analysis, if any, carried out

     (xii)       Credit insurance
              • PIO to confirm the aggregate credit insurance cover taken by the Bank w.r.t
                 the o/s MUDRA loans as at March 31, 2019

     (xiii)      Case studies and sample credit cases
              • PIO to confirm that the Bank has made case studies on varied enterprise
                 business models for each district or other geography of India, along with tie
                 ups with suppliers, vendors, training companies and video and audio kits for
                 the same
                    o If Yes, PIO to confirm that all the said data is in e-format

If Yes, PIO to confirm that all the said data is available on the web on an authenticated
source of the GOI"



        The CPIO did not give any reply. Dissatisfied with the same, the complainant filed
first appeal dated 23.12.2019. The complainant without waiting for the order of the FAA
filed a complaint dated 26.12.2019 before the Commission which is under consideration.



3.       The complainant has filed the instant complaint dated 26.12.2019 inter alia on the
grounds that the CPIO did not give any reply to the RTI application which was deemed
rejection under 
section 7 (2)
 of the RTI Act. The complainant requested the Commission
to to take necessary action as per 
Section 20 (1)
 of the RTI Act.



                                                                                     Page 10 of 17


 4.     As per the records submitted by the complainant for filing of complaint dated
26.12.2019, it was revealed that the CPIO as well as the FAA did not give any reply or
information.



Hearing on 17.08.2021

4.1.   The complainant and on behalf of the respondent Shri Ashok Kumar Mishra,
CPIO and Deputy General Manager and Shri Jaseem Siddiqui, Chief Manager(Law),
Punjab National Bank, Delhi, attended the hearing through video conference.



Interim order dated 31.08.2021

4.2.   The Commission has passed the following observations and directions on
31.08.2021

       "6.5 The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case,
       hearing both the parties and perusal of records, observed that no reply was given by
       the respondent in response to the RTI application dated 15.10.2019 so far in spite of
       almost two years having elapsed from the date of filing the RTI application. Further,
       perusal of the records including the dispatch details revealed that the hearing notice
       for the hearing of the instant complaint was dispatched on 20.07.2021. However, the
       respondent made no efforts to obtain a copy of the RTI application from either the
       complainant, the web portal of the CIC or the Registry of this Bench. This reflects
       their casual and callous attitude towards both the 
RTI Act
 as well as the Commission.
       In view of the above, Shri Ashok Kumar Mishra, present CPIO and the then CPIO (as
       on 15.10.2019) are show caused as to why penalty as per 
section 20 (1)
 of the RTI
       Act may not be imposed upon each of them for not responding to the RTI application
       within stipulated time. Shri Ashok Kumar Mishra is given the responsibility to serve a
       copy of this order upon the then CPIO and secure his written explanations as well as
       his attendance on the next date of hearing i.e. on 28.09.2021. All written submissions
       must be uploaded on the Commission's web portal within 21 days. The matter is
       posted to 28.09.2021."



                                                                                 Page 11 of 17


 Hearing on 28.09.2021


5.      The complainant attended the hearing through video conference and on behalf of
the respondent Shri Ashok Kumar Mishra, Dy. General Manager & CPIO, Shri S.S.
Yadav, Retired Dy. General Manager, Shri Sudhir Sharma, Retd. Dy. General Manager,
Shri Jaseem Siddiqui, Chief Manager-Law, Shri Kunal Chauhan, Law Officer, Punjab
Nation Bank, New Delhi attended the hearing in person.



5.1.    The complainant inter alia submitted that he had received CPIO's reply dated
20.09.2021, but the same as incomplete and evasive. He further submitted that most of
the information sought was denied on the pretext of 
section 2 (f)
 and 
7 (9)
 of the RTI
Act. He alleged that the respondent failed to provide specific reasons or rationale while
refusing the information. The complainant further submitted that the respondent had not
provided complete information within the stipulated time. The complainant argued that
the information was sought in the interest of transparency, accountability and larger
public interest. Therefore, the same should have been provided within the stipulated
time. Accordingly, he requested the Commission to impose maximum penalty on the
concerned CPIO for providing mala fide, incomplete and evasive delayed reply and
direct the respondent to provide complete information.
5.2.    The respondent while defending their case inter alia submitted that RTI
application as well as the first appeal was not received by them, hence, reply to the same
could not be given within the stipulated time. However, in compliance of the order dated
31.08.2021 of the Commission, they had obtained the RTI application and relevant
documents from the Commission and provided point-wise information/reply to the
complainant vide letter dated 20.09.2021 and the same is produced as under:-



"NPA in the 3 categories (Shishu, Kishor and Tarun)
      Copy enclosed as Annexure 1
      The query raised is not "information" under Right to Information act 2005.



                                                                               Page 12 of 17


 Disbursals

   Copy enclosed as Annexure A.
   The query raised is not "Information" under Right to Information act 2005.
   Information asked is not available in the record in the form and format it is asked
     and compilation of the same will divert the resources of the bank
     disproportionately. Hence cannot provide under 
section 7(9)
 of the Right to
     Information Act, 2005.

   The query raised is not "Information" under Right to Information act 2005.
   Information asked is not available in the record in the form and format it is asked
     and compilation of the same will divert the resources of the bank
     disproportionately. Hence cannot provide under 
section 7(9)
 of the Right to
     Information Act, 2005.

   The query raised is not "Information" under Right to Information act 2005.
   Information asked is not available in the record in the form and format it is asked
     and compilation of the same will divert the resources of the bank
     disproportionately. Hence cannot provide under 
section 7(9)
 of the Right to
     Information Act, 2005.



Tarun and Kishor loans

   Query raised is not clear and vague.

   Information asked is not available in the record in the form and format it is asked
     and compilation of the same will divert the resources of the bank
     disproportionately. Hence cannot provide under 
section 7(9)
 of the Right to
     Information Act, 2005.

   Information sought is enclosed as Annexure B.
   For rest of categories Information asked is not available in the record in the form
     and format it is asked and RTI act does not require the CPIO to create
     information. Moreover compilation of the same will divert the resources of the
     bank disproportionately. Hence cannot provide under 
section 7(9)
 of the Right to
     Information Act, 2005.

                                                                            Page 13 of 17


 Proof of expenditure

    Information asked is not available in the record in the form and format it is asked
      and RTI act does not require the CPIO to create information. Moreover
      compilation of the same will divert the resources of the bank disproportionately.
      Hence cannot provide under 
section 7(9)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.



Wilful Defaulters and Suits Filed or Recovery initiated cases

    No such information available on record.



Technology/ ERP Platforms

    The query raised is not "Information" under Right to Information act 2005.
    Bank unified software for retail as well as MSME loan. There is no specific
      specimen for mudra loan.

    Information asked is not available in the record in the form and format it is asked
      and RTI act does not require the CPIO to create information. Moreover
      compilation of the same will divert the resources of the bank disproportionately.
      Hence cannot provide under 
section 7(9)
 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.



Banks and 3rd party services

    The query raised is not "Information" under Right to Information act 2005.
    No such information held on record.



Repeat Borrowers

    The query raised is not "Information" under Right to Information act 2005.



Procedures

    Application form for MUDRA loan is enclosed. Project report is submitted by
      applicant as per proposed activity.



                                                                             Page 14 of 17


 Statistics

      All the data regarding Mudra Loan sanction, disbursement, outstanding, NPA are
        being uploaded by banks on website. www.mudra.org.in on periodic basis as per
        Government guidelines. We have already uploaded above data till 31.03.2021 on
        above mentioned website.



Audits and Inspections

      The query raised is not "Information" under Right to Information act 2005.



Credit Insurance

      No aggregate insurance is being taken by the bank for credit facility. However
        every credit facility where asset is hypothecated to bank is to be insured
        comprehensively as per bank clause.



Case Studies and Sample Credit cases

      The query raised is not "Information" under Right to Information act 2005."

Further, they tendered unconditional apology for the inconvenience caused to the
complainant as well as the Commission. It was stated that they had full faith and regard
for the Commission and had no intention what-so-ever to show any kind of disrespect or
willful disobedience towards the Hon'ble Commission. They stated that written
explanations of both the CPIOs in response to the show cause notices were submitted on
web portal of the Commission. They stated that they had acted in good faith without
having any mala fide and accordingly requested the Commission to drop the penalty
proceedings.



6.      The Commission after adverting to the facts and circumstances of the case, hearing
both the parties and perusal of records, observed that point-wise information/reply was
given by the respondent vide letter dated 20.09.2021. The respondent during the course
of hearing submitted that the RTI application as well as the first appeal was not received
by them, hence, reply to the same could not be given within the stipulated time. The


                                                                               Page 15 of 17

 respondent have submitted detailed written explanations in response to the show cause
notices. It was also submitted that most of the information sought by the complainant was
not specific, definite, inquiry form and it was not maintained by the respondent bank in the
form it was sought. Hence, they expressed their inability to provide the information under

section 2 (f)
 and 
section 7 (9)
 of the RTI Act. It appears that there was no mala fide on part
of the respondent and there was no conscious or deliberate attempt to withhold the
information sought by the appellant. The High Court of Delhi in the decision of Col.



Rajendra Singh v. Central Information Commission and Anr. WP (C
) 5469 of 2008
dated 20.03.2009 had observed as under:




        "
Section 20
, no doubt empowers the CIC to take penal action and direct payment of
        such compensation or penalty as is warranted. Yet the Commission has to be satisfied
        that the delay occurred was without reasonable cause or the request was denied
        malafidely.



......The preceding discussion shows that at least in the opinion of this Court, there are no
allegations to establish that the information was withheld malafide or unduly delayed so as
to lead to an inference that petitioner was responsible for unreasonably withholding it."



Further, in view of the above it is observed that the respondent explained the delay which is
reasonable and in the absence of any mala fide on part of the respondent, it would not be
appropriate to impose a penalty on them. Accordingly, the Show Cause Notice issued to
Shri Ashok Kumar Mishra, present CPIO and the then CPIO (as on 15.10.2019), are
hereby dropped. With the aforementioned observations, the complaint is rejected.

        Copy of the decision be provided free of cost to the parties.



                                                                                      Sd/-

                                                              (Suresh Chandra) (सुरेश चं ा)
                                                                                         ा)
                                                 Information Commissioner (सूचना आयु )
                                                                दनांक/Date: 03.11.2021
Authenticated true copy


                    आर. सीताराम मूत )
R. Sitarama Murthy (आर.



                                                                                   Page 16 of 17


 Dy. Registrar (उप पंजीयक)
011-26181927((०११-२६१८१९२७)


Addresses of the parties:

CPIO :

PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK
MANAGEMENT AUDIT & REVIEW DIVISION
(RIGHT TO INFORMATION CELL)
2ND FLOOR, EAST WING (A), PLOT NO. 4,
SECTOR - 10, DWARKA,
HO: NEW DELHI - 110 075

THE FIRST APPELLATE AUTHORITY,
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK,
MANAGEMENT AUDIT & REVIEW DIVISION
(RIGHT TO INFORMATION CELL)
2ND FLOOR, EAST WING (A),
PLOT NO. 4, SECTOR - 10, DWARKA,
HO: NEW DELHI -110 075


CPIO : 1. SH. ASHOK KUMAR MISHRA
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK, MANAGEMENT
AUDIT & REVIEW DIVISION (RIGHT TO
INFORMATION CELL) 2ND FLOOR, EAST
WING (A), PLOT NO. 4, SECTOR - 10,
DWARKA, HO: NEW DELHI - 110 075



2. SH. ASHOK KUMAR MISHRA (C.P.I.O)
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK, MANAGEMENT
AUDIT & REVIEW DIVISION (RIGHT TO
INFORMATION CELL) 2ND FLOOR, EAST
WING (A), PLOT NO. 4, SECTOR - 10,
DWARKA, HO: NEW DELHI - 110 075 (FOR
FORWARDING TO THE THEN C.P.I.O AS ON
15-10-2019)

SH SAMIR SARDANA





                                        Page 17 of 17