[Cites 
11
, Cited by 
1
]




Central Information Commission


Gangaram vs University Of Delhi on 27 September, 2021


Author: 
Saroj Punhani


Bench: 
Saroj Punhani


                                 के   ीय सूचना आयोग
                          Central Information Commission
                              बाबागंगनाथमाग , मुिनरका
                           Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka
                           नई द ली, New Delhi - 110067


File No : CIC/UODEL/A/2019/639862

Gangaram                                                 ......अपीलकता /Appellant



                                      VERSUS
                                       बनाम


CPIO,
University of Delhi,
RTI Cell, Delhi-110007.                            .... ितवादीगण /Respondent


Date of Hearing                   :   23/09/2021
Date of Decision                  :   23/09/2021

INFORMATION COMMISSIONER :            Saroj Punhani

Relevant facts emerging from appeal:

RTI application filed on          :   24/12/2018
CPIO replied on                   :   16/01/2019
First appeal filed on             :   23/02/2019
First Appellate Authority order   :   22/03/2019
2nd Appeal/Complaint dated        :   Nil




                                        1
 Information sought
:

The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 24.12.2019 seeking the following
information;



     1. Criteria of selection of candidates for the said posts.

     2. Name, post and address of members and Chairperson/Head of Scrutiny
     Committee and Interview Committee.

     3. Criteria for selecting only those members and Chairperson/Head for
     Scrutiny Committee and Interview committee.

     4. All the Vouchers/bills for payment made to, and all Bills/Receipts/Any
     other document, including Toll Tax receipts etc., for receiving TA/DA)
     submitted by, each and every member and Chairperson/Head of Interview
     Committee.

     5. Letters/Invitation Letters/Any other document from DU for inviting each
     and every member and Chairperson/Head of Interview Committee and
     Replies/Acknowledgment of all those members and Chairperson/Head to
     DU.

     6. Details of To and fro of each and every member and chairperson/Head of
     Interview Committee, for which they received payment for travelling.

     7. Video recording of said whole Interview.

     8. Criteria of scrutiny of the forms for said Interview.

     9. Whether Criteria of scrutiny was lowered down, from the criteria already
     fixed under said Advt. 258/2017. If yes, then on what grounds, upto which
     extent, such criteria was lowered down, and under what rules/provisions,

     10. Letter/Circular/Any other document from appropriate authority to
     Scrutiny Committee for lowering down criteria for scrutiny.

     11. Date and Time of Interview Schedule intimated to the called candidates.

     12. Name and Qualification of all candidates, called For interview, and their
     attendance.

     13. Actual timings of starting and closing of Interview of each and every
     day, on which Interview run.

     14. Name of members and Chairperson/Head for Interview Committee for
     each and every day of Interview.

     15. Bifurcation of all marks, given to each and every candidate in Interview
     by each and every member anti Chairperson/Head of Interview. Committee.



                                       2


       Merit List of the finally selected candidates, including !heir Names and their
      qualifications for the said posts.

      17. Application Forms. Along with all attached documents of each and every
      finally selected candidate.

      18. Date of joining of each and every candidate, along with their Joining
      Report/any other document, related to joining.

      19. Total number of selected candidates, which were/had been working in
      University of Delhi, before such selection, along with their name.

      20. Date of publication of the merit list/result of the selected candidate on
      website of University of Delhi and newspapers with their names, and its
      copy and working Internet /ink.

      21. is it mandatory to publish result of selected candidates on website of
      University of Delhi and newspapers. If yes, then in how much time. Provide
      the copy of rule/provision for such publication.



The CPIO forwarded the RTI application on 16.01.2019 for seeking assistance
under section 5(4) of the RTI Act, 2005 to the concerned officers of DU.



Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed a First Appeal dated 23.02.2019. FAA's order
dated 22.03.2019 upheld the reply of CPIO 06.03.2019.



Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied, appellant approached the Commission with the
instant Second Appeal on the ground that the CPIO has denied the information.



Relevant Facts emerging during Hearing:

The following were present:-



Appellant: Not present. (Remained unavailable for audio-conference hearing on
his given contact number).

Respondent: Dr. Jwala Prasad, Assistant Registrar & CPIO present through audio-
conference.



The Commission remarked at the outset that notice of hearing served to the
Appellant was received back with the postal remarks "insufficient address". Also,
the facts remains that the contact number given by the Appellant on the record
does not belong to him.



The CPIO relied on his written submission dated 22.09.2021 and submitted that a
point wise reply along with relevant inputs except personal information of third

                                         3

 party, has already been provided to the Appellant through letters dated
16.01.2019 and 06.03.2019, however, both the letters sent twice have been
received back undelivered with postal remarks "insufficient address". He further
submitted that copy of the said replies has also been sent to the Appellant
through email. Relevant portion of the reply is reproduced below -



     "Point No. 1, 8-10 Screening and other conditions are available on the
     website of the University www.du./ac.in under the head Work with DU -
     >Jobs and Opportunities -> Closed Applications ->Assistant Professor link.
     Point No.2-6& 14:- The disclosure of names of members of the Selection
     Committee can endanger their physical safety and is therefore exempted
     under 
Section 8 (1) (g)
 of the RTI Act. However, a copy of the constitution of
     Selection Committee is enclosed herewith. There are 13 members in the
     Selection Committee.

     Point No.7 :- There is no provision of video recording of interview.
     Point No. 11 & 13 Notification of schedule of interview is enclosed herewith.
     Point No. 12 The list of applicants will reveal information about the
     candidates who were unsuccessful when compared with the list of selected
     candidates which are already in the public domain. This information is
     exempt from disclosure in terms of 
section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI. Act.
     Point No.15:- The marks given to the candidates by the selection committee
     are personal to the candidate concerned in terms of 
section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI
     Act. However, if the applicant was a candidate to the interview he may
     contact the Recruitment Branch with a valid ID proof upto 25th January
     2019.

     Point No.16, 20-21:- The list of selected candidates is available on the
     www.du./ac.in under the head Work with DU with DU ->Jobs and
     Opportunities -> Closed Applications -Assistant Professor link.
     Point No. 17 :- Information sought by the applicant includes information
     which is otherwise personal to the candidates concerned and therefore
     exempt under 
section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act.

     Point No. 18-19:- Information may be obtained from Lay. Registrar (Estab.-
     T). "



Decision:



The current milieu of the COVID pandemic has necessitated the Commission to
take some extraordinary steps in the disposal of cases to avoid further backlog
and delays subverting the very purpose of 
RTI Act
 which includes inter alia

                                        4

 hearing cases through audio conferencing. The instant case being one such
instance where even so the Complainant could not be heard of, the Commission
is constrained to dispose of the case after hearing submissions of the CPIO and
perusing the case records on merits.



In doing so, the Commission observes from a perusal of the facts on record that
the information sought for at points no. 2,4-7,12,14-18 and 19(2nd part) including
TA/DA and other related details of Selection Committee members, proceeding of
entire averred interview and also details of other candidates stands exempted
from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of the RTI Act. 
In this regard, attention of the
Complainant is drawn towards a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
matter of Central Public Information Officer, Supreme Court of 
India Vs. Subhash
Chandra Agarwal
 in Civil Appeal No. 10044 of 2010 with Civil Appeal No. 10045
of 2010 and Civil Appeal No. 2683 of 2010 wherein the import of "personal
information" envisaged under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act has been exemplified in
the context of earlier 4 ratios 
laid down by
 the same Court in the matter(
s) of
Canara Bank Vs. C.S. Shyam
 in Civil Appeal No.22 of 2009; 
Girish Ramchandra
Deshpande vs. Central Information Commissioner &Ors.
, (2013) 1 SCC 212 and
R.K. Jain vs. Union of India &Anr., (2013) 14 SCC 794. The following was thus
held:




      "59. Reading of the aforesaid judicial precedents, in our opinion, would
      indicate that personal records, including name, address, physical, mental
      and psychological status, marks obtained, grades and answer sheets, are all
      treated as personal information. Similarly, professional records, including
      qualification, performance, evaluation reports, ACRs, disciplinary
      proceedings, etc. are all personal information. Medical records, treatment,
      choice of medicine, list of hospitals and doctors visited, findings recorded,
      including that of the family members, information relating to assets,
      liabilities, income tax returns, details of investments, lending and
      borrowing, etc. are personal information. Such personal information is
      entitled to protection from unwarranted invasion of privacy and conditional
      access is available when stipulation of larger public interest is satisfied. This
      list is indicative and not exhaustive..."



Notwithstanding the aforesaid, the queries raised at points no. 9 and 21 do not
conform to 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act as the Appellant has sought
clarification/inference from the CPIO based on his interrogatories. 
In this regard,
the Appellant shall note that outstretching the interpretation of 
Section 2(f)
 of the

                                          5


RTI Act
 to include deductions and inferences to be drawn by the CPIO is
unwarranted as it casts immense pressure on the CPIOs to ensure that they
provide the correct deduction/inference to avoid being subject to penal
provisions under the 
RTI Act
.His attention is also drawn a judgment of Hon'ble
Supreme Court on the scope and ambit of 
Section 2(f)
 of RTI Act in the matter of

CBSE vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Ors
 [CIVIL APPEAL NO.6454 of 2011] wherein it
was held as under:




          "35. At this juncture, it is necessary to clear some misconceptions
   about the 
RTI Act
. 
The RTI Act
 provides access to all information that is
   available and existing. This is clear from a combined reading of 
section
   3
 and the definitions of `information' and `right to information' under
   clauses (f) and (j) of 
section 2
 of the Act. If a public authority has any
   information in the form of data or analysed data, or abstracts, or statistics,
   an applicant may access such information, subject to the exemptions
   in 
section 8
 of the Act. But where the information sought is not a part of the
   record of a public authority, and where such information is not required to
   be maintained under any law or the rules or regulations of the public
   authority, the Act does not cast an obligation upon the public authority, to
   collect or collate such non- available information and then furnish it to an
   applicant. A public authority is also not required to furnish information
   which require drawing of inferences and/or making of assumptions. It is
   also not required to provide `advice' or `opinion' to an applicant, nor
   required to obtain and furnish any `opinion' or `advice' to an applicant.
   The reference to `opinion' or `advice' in the definition of `information'
   in 
section 2(f)
 of the Act, only refers to such material available in the
   records of the public authority. Many public authorities have, as a public
   relation exercise, provide advice, guidance and opinion to the citizens. But
   that is purely voluntary and should not be confused with any obligation
   under the 
RTI Act
." (Emphasis Supplied)
Nonetheless, the reply given by the CPIO on all the points adequately suffices the
information sought for by the Appellant as per the provisions of 
RTI Act
, leaving
behind no scope of further relief in the matter.

However, the CPIO is advised to exercise due diligence and exercise due process
of law as per the 
RTI Act
 while divulging any third party's personal information to
the applicant which is exempted from disclosure under 
Section 8(1)(j)
 of RTI Act.



                                         6


                     The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



                                                  Saroj Punhani (सरोजपुनहािन)
                                                                        हािन)
                                       Information Commissioner (सूचनाआयु )
Authenticated true copy
(अिभ मािणत स"यािपत  ित)

(C.A. Joseph)
Dy. Registrar
011-26179548/ 
[email protected]

सी. ए. जोसेफ, उप-पंजीयक
 दनांक /





                                      7